
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
672 
YCT 
18. 
PEDAGOGY OF LANGUAGE 
DEVELOPMENT 
A.  LEARNING AND 
ACQUISITION 
1. 
 Jatin Ragav is reading fast, looking for specific 
information in a machinery manual. What is 
this reading sub skill known as?   
 
(a) Bottom up reading 
(b) Critical reading  
 
(c) Skimming 
(d) Scanning 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (d) : Scanning is reading a text quickly in order to 
find specific information, e.g. figures on names. It can 
be contrasted with skimming, which is reading quickly 
to get a general idea of meaning.   
2. 
 What is the following activity known as in 
vocabulary learning?  
 
 Find word which can befriend the word 'rain'. 
e.g. heavy rain. 
 
(a) Word groups 
(b) Word web  
 
(c) Collocation 
(d) Phrase 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (c) : A collocation is made up of two or more 
words that are commonly used together in English. For 
example in English we usually say heavy rain.   
3. 
 Denotative meaning of a word is _____  
 
(a) figurative meaning  
 
(b) grammatical meaning  
 
(c) factual meaning or a basic meaning 
 
(d) much more than what a word actually means 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (c) : Meaning of denotative in English is its main 
meaning, not including the feelings and ideas that 
people may connect with that word. Denotative 
meaning refers to factual meaning of a word.    
4. 
 'We acquire... language by understanding input 
that is a little beyond our current level of 
(acquired) 
competence. 
'What 
is 
this 
pedagogical concept known as?    
 
(a) Input hypothesis  
 
(b) Thinking hypothesis  
 
(c) Output hypothesis 
 
(d) Interaction hypothesis 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (a) : 'Input hypothesis'. 
Input hypothesis:  This states that learners progress in 
their knowledge of the language when they comprehend 
language input that is slightly more advanced than their 
current level.  
……..... called this level of input (i + 1) where 'I' is the 
learner's inter language and (+1) is the next stage of 
language learning.   
5. 
Which commission in 1948 accepted the 
importance of English language in curriculum? 
 (a) Dr. Radhakrishnan Commission 
 (b) The Secondary Education Commission 
 (c) Central Advisory Board of Education 
 (d) Kothari Education Commission 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (a) The Government of India appointed the 
Radhakrishnan Commission on Nov. 4th, 1948 to 
report on Indian university Education which accepted 
the importance of English language in curriculum. Dele: 
efJekeâuhe (a) correct answer nw~ Mes<e efJekeâuhe Proper answer 
veneR nQ~   
6. 
Which of the following words has a diphthong 
sound? 
 (a) Speed 
(b) Liquid 
 (c) Paternal 
(d) Out 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (d) Word 'Out' has a diphthong sound. A 
diphthong is a vowel in which the speaker's tongue 
changes position while it is being pronounced, so that 
the vowel sounds like a combination of the two other 
vowels. 
Skeâ meeLe GÛÛeeefjle oes mJejeW mes yeveer Skeâue OJeefve, efÉmJej, mebefOe 
mJej, mebÙegòeâ mJej pewmes Meyo 'Fine' ceW ‘DeeF’ keâer OJeefve~ 
7. 
 The study of the formation of words is known 
as :  
 
(a) Phonology 
(b) Morphology 
 
(c) Syntax 
(d) Semantics 
UK TET (VI-VIII) 2020 
Ans. (b) : The study of the formation of word in known 
as – Morphology. (Deeke=âefle efJe%eeve). 
Morphology :–  MeyoeW kesâ ™he keâe Yee<ee Jew%eeefvekeâ DeOÙeÙeve, 
Meyo ™he efJe%eeve keânueelee nw~ 
(The form of words, studies as a branch of linguistics.) 
Mes<e DevÙe efJekeâuheeW keâe DeLe& – 
Phonology :– It is a branch of linguistics that studies 
how language or dialects systematically organize their 
sounds. 
8. 
When language is learnt without practice, it is 
called: 
 (a) Learning 
(b) First language 
 (c) Acquisition 
(d) Erudition 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 2 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
673 
YCT 
Ans. (b) First language is spoken by parents or 
relatives. It is used as native or mother tongue without 
practice. 
ØeLece Yee<ee ceelee-efhelee Ùee meies mecyeefvOeÙeeW kesâ Éeje ØeÙeesie keâer peeleer 
nw~ pees efkeâ Ùen ceele=-Yee<ee kesâ ™he ceW efyevee DeYÙeeme kesâ ØeÙeesie keâer 
peeleer nw~ FmeerefueS efJekeâuhe (b) GheÙegòeâ Gòej nw~ 
9. 
Phonologically the number of semi-vowels 
English is: 
 (a) 1 
(b) 2 
 (c) 4 
(d) 5 
UK TET (VI-VIII) 2020 
Ans. (b) Phonology ceW semi-vowels oes nesles nQ~ pees efkeâ Y 
Deewj W nQ~ efpemes nce semi-vowels kesâ veece mes peeveles nQ~ 
Example – Cry or how. FmeerefueS efJekeâuhe (b) GheÙegòeâ Gòej 
nesiee~ 
10.  Learning outcomes aim at :  
 
(a) achieving maximum levels of learning 
 
(b) achieving minimum levels of learning 
 
(c) ensuring all the competencies are acquired by 
learners 
 
(d) output oriented learning 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (c) : Learning outcomes aim at ensuring all the 
competencies are acquired by learners. Basically 
learning outcomes are statements that describe the 
knowledge or skills student should acquire by the end of 
a particular assignment, class and courses.    
11.  Which of the following statements is TRUE of 
language learning ?  
 
(a) First language supports the learning of second 
language 
 
(b) Language learning has nothing to do with 
content learning 
 
(c) Every language is different and learning of 
languages is also discreet 
 
(d) First language interferes in the learning of 
second language. 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (a) : Language learning is broadly defined as 
developing the ability to communicate in the 
second/foreign 
language. 
Target 
languages 
for 
instruction including the teaching of the languages of a 
non native speakers, where the target language is 
normally used as the language instruction. 
12.  A reader uses her prior knowledge, makes 
semantic cues and syntactic cues then moves to 
other more specific information. What model 
of reading the reader here adopts ?  
 
(a) Top down model 
(b) Interactive model 
 
(c) Whole language model (d) Bottom up model 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (a) : In top down model a reader receives 
knowledge from an instructor, then tests his prior 
knowledge, makes semantic cues and syntactic cues 
then moves to other more specific information.   
13.  'Input Hypothesis' refers to :  
 
(a) the relationship between what languages the 
learners know and the languages they are 
taught. 
 
(b) the relationship among the learner, teacher 
and the materials 
 
(c) All the inputs of the school 
 
(d) the relationship between what the learner is 
exposed  to of a language and language 
acquisition 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
Ans. (d) : The input hypothesis also known as the 
monitor model, is a group of five hypothesis of second 
language acquisition developed by the linguist Stephen 
Krashen in the 1970s and 1980s. It refers to the 
relationship between what the learners is exposed to of 
a language and language acquisition.  
14.  A language teacher asks learners to write a 
paragraph on 'scarcity of water'. Learners 
gather information from science and social 
science books and other sources before writing. 
Such task aims at :  
 
(a) completing the syllabus of other subjects 
simultaneously 
 
(b) achieving language learning across the 
curriculum 
 
(c) enhancing co-curricular skills 
 
(d) developing the scientific attitude 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
Ans. (b) : If in learning process learners gather 
information from many sources like science books, 
social books etc. before writing on any topic. Its 
purpose is to achieve language learning across the 
curriculum.  
15. 
What are these words known as ? 
 
– the, of, and, a, to, that, it with, but, they, she, 
he 
 
(a) Form words 
(b) Use words 
 
(c) Unimportant words (d) Sight words 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans : (d) Option (d) is correct. 
All the given words are known as sight words, Sight 
words are commonly used word that young children are 
encouraged to meamorize as a whole by sight, so that 
they can automatically recognized these words in print 
within three seconds without having to use any 
strategies to decode. 
16.  'Comprehensible 
input' 
as 
proposed 
by 
Krashen (1985) is : 
 
(a) exposing learners to language somewhat 
above their level. 
 
(b) exposing learners to language below their 
level so that they can comprehend 
 
(c) enabling learners to read in many languages 
 
(d) enabling learners to comprehend ideas. 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans. (a) : 'Comprehensible input' as proposed by 
krashen (1985) is exposing learners to language 
somewhat above their level.  
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 3 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
674 
YCT 
17.  This is assumed to be a major difference 
between language acquisition and learning. 
 
(a) Language acquisition happens at an early 
stage while language learning takes place 
later. 
 
(b) Language acquisition always happens in 
mother tongue and language learning happens 
in the second language  
 
(c) Language acquisition is meaning formation 
and language learning is making meaning 
 
(d) Language acquisition is natural and language 
learning is deliberate/instructed 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans. (d) : Language acquisition is natural and language 
learning is deliberate/instructed 
18.  Language is : 
 
(a) a structure formed system 
 
(b) a formation of words, rules and meanings  
 
(c) a human system which changes frequently 
 
(d) a rule governed system 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans. (d) : Language is a rule governed system. 
(1) Language is a medium of expressing ideas, thoughts 
and feeling. 
(2) It is using as a communication and interaction 
(3) It is symbolic and dynamic 
(4) It is structured and active system of social 
behaviour   
19.  A student reads through an article in a 
newspaper to get the overall idea of article. 
What is this (practice) known as? 
 
(a) Skimming  
(b) Top-down model  
 
(c) Bottom-up model 
(d) Scanning 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans. (d) : Scanning– Scanning means examining 
everything closely and minutely i.e. getting detail 
information. Here students get overall idea after reading 
article. So option (d) is correct.  
20. 
A teacher divides her class into groups of five 
and allocates different themes to the groups. 
The groups have to collect information on the 
themes and write reports to be presented to the 
class. What is this activity known as? 
 
(a) Project work 
(b) Writing work 
 
(c) Research  
(d) Assignment 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II July, 2019 
Ans : (a) Project work is a learning experience which 
aims to provide students with the opportunity to 
synthesis knowledge from various areas of learning and 
critically and creativity apply it to real life situation. 
It always focused on the groups theme which gather the 
information and present reports on the basis of class. 
21. 
What is the following strategy known as in 
reading? 
 
The text is read more slowly and in detail to get 
the gist or overall sense of the text. 
 
(a) Summarising 
(b) Skimming 
 
(c) Scaffolding 
(d) Scanning 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II July, 2019 
Ans : (b) Skimming– skimming is reading a text 
quickly to get a general idea of meaning . It is a specific 
reading skill which is common in reading. It is 
important that learners understand that there is no need 
to read every word when skimming. So often teachers 
set this as a timid task to encourage speed. 
22. 
A teacher gives a puzzle to her class-VIII 
students and asks them to solve it by speaking 
out how they solve it. What is this strategy 
known as? 
 
(a) Think aloud protocol 
(b) Listening 
 
(c) Picture reading 
(d) Speaking aloud 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II July, 2019 
Ans : (a) Think aloud protocol is a method used to 
gather data in usability testing in product design and 
developement in psychology and a range of social 
science. 
It is also used in language learning. Here a teacher gives 
a puzzle to her class for testing how they solve it. 
23.  Which one of the following does not come 
under the principle of selection and gradation? 
 
(a) Accuracy 
(b) Availability  
 
(c) Coverage 
(d) Frequency 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2018  
Ans. (a) : Accuracy does not come under the principle 
of selection and gradation.  
24.  The phenomenon, where a single word is 
associated 
with 
two 
or 
several 
related 
meanings, is known as– 
 
(a) homonyms 
(b) homograph  
 
(c) polysemy 
(d) homonymy 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2018  
Ans. (c) : The phenomenon, where a single word is 
associated with two or several related meanings, is 
known as polysemy.  
25.  ________ are involved in thinking. 
 
(a) Image, language, imagination, proposition 
 
(b) Image, imagination, proposition  
 
(c) Imagination, language, concept, proposition 
 
(d) Image, language, concept, proposition 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2018  
Ans. (c) : Imagination, language, concept, proposition 
are involved in thinking.  
26.  Students are not organisms. Which one of the 
following methods sees them as a whole person? 
 
(a) CLT 
(b) SLT  
 
(c) Silent way 
(d) CLL 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2018  
Ans. (d) : Community Language Learning (CLL) is a 
language teaching approach in which student's work 
together to develop what aspects of a language they 
would like to them. It is based on the counselling-
approach in which the teacher acts as a counselor and a 
paraphraser, while the learner is seen as a client and 
collaborator. 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 4 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
675 
YCT 
27. As per Noam Chomsky's theory, the role of 
Language Acquisition Device (LAD) is to 
 (a) generate grammar rules 
 (b) memories grammar rules 
 (c) learn languages in formal schools 
 (d) imitate the language of adults 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2016  
Ans: (d) Noam Chomsky theory the role of Language 
Acquisition Device (LAD) is related to imitate the 
language of adults. Hence option (d) gives the precise 
answer of this question. Other options are wrong.  
28. Language proficiency refers to 
 A. fluency 
B. accuracy 
 C. appropriateness 
D. efficiency 
 Which of the above are true? 
 (a) A, B and C 
(b) A, B and D 
 (c) B, C and D 
(d) A, C and D 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2016  
Ans : (d) Language proficiency or linguistic is the 
ability of an individual to speak or perform in an 
acquired language. Additionally fluency, efficiency 
appropriateness are generally recognized as being 
related as theories among pedagogies. Hence option 
(d) is correct. 
29. …..is the father of modern linguistics. 
 (a) Bloomsfield 
 
 (b) Ferdinand de Saussure 
 (c) Chomsky 
 (d) Chaucer 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (b) Ferdinand de Saussure is the father of 
modern linguistics. Hence option (b) would be 
correct. 
30. ……is a pre-requisite to learning a language. 
 (a) Motivation 
 (b) Reading stories 
 (c) Knowing words and their meanings 
 (d) Knowledge of grammar 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (a) Motivation is a pre-requisite to learning a 
language. Hence option (a) would be correct. 
31. A phoneme is a 
 (a) technique to improve pronunciation 
 (b) single sound unit 
 (c) sound pattern 
 (d) lexical item 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (b) A phoneme is a single sound unit. Hence 
option (b) would be correct. 
32. A task-based language learning is 
 
(a) a piece of work which involves engagement 
with language 
 (b) a physical activity 
 (c) a piece of assignment 
 (d) an activity for reading 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2015 
Ans : (a) In task-based language learning a task is a 
piece of work which involves engagement with 
language. Hence option (a). 
33. The idea of ‘comprehensible input’ was first 
used by 
 (a) Stephen Karashen 
(b) N S Prabhu 
 (c) Chomsky 
(d) Vygotsky 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2015 
Ans : (a) The idea of ‘comprehensible input’ was first 
used by Stephen Karashen. Hence option (a). 
34. Poverty of stimulus with respect to language 
acquisition among young children implies that 
they would 
 (a) not recognize human language 
 
(b) need more stimulus at home for learning 
language 
 (c) express themselves ungrammatically 
 (d) read later 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
Ans : (b) In language acquisition among young 
children they need more stimulus at home for learning 
language. Hence option (b) is correct. 
35. Considering student’s learning styles broadens 
the approaches taken to help language-related 
problems. An example of a learning style is 
 (a) print-orientated 
(b) focused 
 (c) loud 
(d) quiet 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
Ans : (a) Pring-orientation is an example of a learning 
style approach to help the students having language-
related problems. Hence option (a) is correct. 
36. Learners who develop an increased awareness of 
‘their own style’ of learning and teacher’s 
awareness of students individual style enhance 
….. learning. 
 (a) cooperative 
(b) individualistic 
 (c) group 
(d) blased 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
Ans : (a) When the teacher takes interest in the 
development of student’s style of learning and the 
students themselves are aware of their own style 
enhances ‘cooperative’ learning. Hence option (a) is 
correct. 
37. Students-generated corrections are important in 
language  learning because 
 
(a) students revise and edit the errors in their own 
writing or speech 
 
(b) they indicate active engagement in the learning 
process 
 
(c) more time can be given to grammar drills 
before production 
 (d) teachers can conduct more remedial classes 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
Ans 
: 
(b) 
Students-generated 
corrections 
are 
important in language learning because they indicate 
active engagement in the learning process. Hence 
option (b) is correct. 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 5 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
676 
YCT 
38. The process of second language acquisition is 
influenced by languages that the learner already 
knows. The influence is …… 
 (a) inter-language 
(b) systemic errors 
 (c) language transfer 
(d) phonology 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
Ans : (c) The process of second language acquisition 
is brought about by language transfer. Hence option (c) 
is correct. 
39. A self-contained unit of a discourse in writing 
dealing with a particular point or idea is 
 (a) an essay 
(b) a poem 
 (c) a paragraph 
(d) a statement 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July 2013 
Ans : (c) A paragraph deals with a particular point or 
idea. Hence option (c) would be correct. 
40. In learning a new language, multilingualism is 
 (a) a burden 
(b) a methodology 
 (c) an asset 
(d) an interference 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Jan 2012 
Ans : (d) In learning a new language multilingualism 
is an interference Kaplar explained that in L2 (or 
second language) classes, students will face the 
difficulties on thinking in the target language as they 
are influenced by their native language and culture 
patters. Hence option (d) is correct. 
41. Learners acquire a language by 
 
(a) learning about the culture of the speakers of 
that language 
 
(b) using the language in a natural interactive 
environment 
 
(c) analyzing the structure of the language 
 (d) studying the literature of that language 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Jan 2012 
Ans : (a) Learners acquire a new language by learning 
about the culture of the speakers of that language. 
Hence option (a) is correct. 
42. Language acquisition 
 
(a) refers to process of learning a native or second 
language because of the innate capacity of the 
human brain 
 
(b) is a technique intended to simulate the 
environment in which children learn their 
native language 
 
(c) requires the memorization and use necessary 
vocabulary 
 
(d) involves a systematic approach to the analysis 
and comprehension of  grammar as well as to 
the memorization of vocabulary 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
Ans : (a) Language acquisition refers to the process of 
acquiring or learning a native of second language. 
Hence option (a) would be correct. 
43. Iconic mode of learning is based on a system of 
using 
 (a) different types of graphs 
 (b) a variety of activities 
 (c) symbols 
 (d) images and diagrams 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
Ans : (d) Iconic mode of learning is based on images 
and diagrams. Hence option (d) would be correct. 
44. What is taught is not what is learnt because 
 
(a) a teacher’s socio-economic level may differ 
widely from the students’ 
 
(b) a teacher of learner can never fully master any 
discipline 
 
(c) students possess different abilities, persona-
lities and come from a variety of backgrounds 
 
(d) students pay attention during informal discussion 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
Ans : (c) What is taught cannot be exactly learned by 
all the students because they possess different 
abilities, personalities and come from a variety of 
backgrounds. Learning is dependent on these factors. 
Hence option (c) would be correct. 
45. According to NCF 2005 [3.1.3], “At the initial 
stages of language learning ….. may be one of 
the languages for learning activities that create 
the child’s awareness of the world.” 
 (a) Hindi 
(b) English 
 (c) Vernacular Language 
(d) II Language 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
Ans : (b) The National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 
2005 says that “English  may be one of the languages 
for learning activities that create the child’s awareness 
of the world” at the initial stages. Hence option (b) 
would be correct. 
46. Enquiry based learning 
 (a) encourages quiet learners 
 (b) does not nurture creative thinking in students 
 (c) allows learners to raise questions 
 
(d) does not place students in thought provoking 
situations 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
Ans : (c) Enquiry based learning allows or encourages 
learners to ask questions. Hence option (c). 
47. Some noise in the language class indicates 
 (a) teacher’s lack of control over the class 
 (b) incompetence of the teacher 
 
(c) constructive activities with learners engaged in 
language learning 
 (d) indiscipline of learners 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
Ans : (c) Some noise in the language class indicates 
the constructive activities of learners engaged in 
language learning. Hence option (c). 
48. Effective learning takes place when students are 
 (a) interactive 
 (b) quiet 
 (c) good at preparing for examinations 
 (d) passive 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
Ans : (a) Effective learning takes place in an 
interactive environment. Hence option (a). 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 6 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
677 
YCT 
49. Pedagogical knowledge includes 
 (a) knowledge of content 
 (b) knowledge of method 
 (c) Both (a) and (b) 
 (d) None of the above 
UPTET (VI-VIII) Feb. 2016 
Ans : (c) efJe<eÙe meece«eer keâer peevekeâejer leLee Fve efJe<eÙeeW kesâ ØeÙeesie 
keâer GefÛele efJeefOe keâer peevekeâejer Pedagogical knowledge 
keânueelee nw efpemekeâe DeLe& efMe#eCe keâer heæefle neslee nw~ Ùen oesveeW 
iegCe efJekeâuhe (a) leLee efJekeâuhe (b) ceW efoÙee ieÙee nw Dele: efJekeâuhe 
(c) both (a) and (b) mener Gòej nw~ 
50. English is a ............ language in India. 
 (a) second 
(b) foreign 
 (c) first 
(d) global 
UPTET (VI-VIII) Feb. 2016 
Ans : (a) Deb«espeer Yeejle keâer _______  Yee<ee nw~ Fmekesâ efjòeâ 
mLeeve ceW GheÙegòeâ Meyo ‘efÉleerÙe Yee<ee’ keâe DeLe& Øeoeve keâjves kesâ 
efueÙes efJekeâuhe (a) ceW efoÙes ieÙes Meyo second keâe ner ØeÙeesie nesiee~ 
efoÙes ieÙes DevÙe efJekeâuhe– foreign–efJeosMeer, first–henueer, 
global–JewefÕekeâ, ieuele efJekeâuhe nQ~ 
51. Choose the correct answer. 
 What is rote learning? 
 
(a) Mechanical or habitual learning without 
understanding properly 
 (b) Learning with great zeal and enthusiasm 
 (c) Learning without interest 
 (d) None of the above 
UPTET (VI-VIII) June, 2013 
Ans : (c) Rote learning is memorization without 
taking interest. Hence option (c) would be correct. 
B. 
PRINCIPLES OF 
LANGUAGE TEACHING 
 
52.  'Habit formation through repetition' is a 
component of which method?  
 
(a) Task based language teaching  
 
(b) Constructivism  
 
(c) Communicative approach 
 
(d) Audio lingualism 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (d) : Habit formation through repetition is a 
component of Audio lingualism. The audio-lingual 
method is, via teaching vocabulary and grammatical 
patterns through dialogues, to enable students to 
respond quickly and accurately in spoken language. 
53.  Which one of the following components is a 
process in the Top Down approach to teaching-
learning of listening?  
 
(a) Recognising prominent details  
 
(b) Recognising the topic  
 
(c) Discriminating between intonation compounds 
 
(d) Discriminating between phonemes 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (b) : Recognising the topic is a process in the top 
down approach to teaching-learning of listening.   
54.  Multilingualism as a strategy is  
 
(a) teaching of  all subjects in English medium 
and teaching Indian languages as a language.  
 
(b) teaching of a foreign language along with 
Indian languages through the medium of the 
state language.   
 
(c) using the languages of learners for teaching-
learning of languages and content subjects. 
 
(d) teaching-learning of at least three languages 
and content in mother tongue. 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (c) : Multilingualism is the use of more than one 
language, either by an individual speaker or by a group 
of speakers. Children acquiring two languages natively 
from these early years are called simultaneous 
bilinguals.  
Thus, multilingualism is an inevitable strategy across 
the world to bridge wider cultural communication gap.   
55.  A teacher asks her learners to join sentences to 
make a short paragraph, inserting supplied 
connectors and coherence markers like (but, 
and, however, because, although, etc.)  
 
 What is this approach to writing known as? 
 
(a) Free-writing approach  
 
(b) Communicative approach  
 
(c) Control composition 
 
(d) Controlled-to-free writing approach 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (d) : 'controlled-to-free writing approach'   
The controlled to free approach : Here, the students 
are given sentence exercise, then paragraphs to copy or 
manipulate 
grammatically, 
these 
controlled 
compositions then followed by correction of errors, so 
that it can lead to the free composition. Overall this 
approach focuses on accuracy rather than fluency.  
56. In which of the following methods of teaching 
English language 'Inductive and Deductive 
techniques' of teaching are used? 
 (a) Grammar cum Translation method 
 (b) Direct method 
 (c) Substitution method 
 (d) Bilingual method 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (b) Inductive and Deductive Techniques 
(Deeieceveelcekeâ leLee efveieceveelcekeâ lekeâveerkeâ)  
Deeieceveelcekeâ lekeâveerkeâ leke&â keâer Jen Øeef›eâÙee nw efpemeceW %eele leLÙeeW 
keâes peesÌ[keâj DeefOekeâ JÙeehekeâ keâLeve efveefce&le efkeâÙee peelee nw~ 
efveieceveelcekeâ lekeâveerkeâ ceW Skeâ Ùee DeefOekeâ %eele meeceevÙe keâLeveeW kesâ 
DeeOeej hej efkeâmeer efveef§ele efve<keâ<e& hej hengBÛee pee mekeâlee nw~ Gòeâ 
Techniques Direct method ceW use keâer peeleer nw~ Mes<e efJekeâuhe 
GheÙegòeâ Gòej veneR nQ~ 
57. Dr. West's 'New Method' of teaching English 
emerged to overcome the limitations of which of 
the following methods? 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 7 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
678 
YCT 
 (a) Grammar cum Translation method 
 (b) Substitution method 
 (c) Direct method 
 (d) Situational method 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (c) Dr. West's New Method of teaching English 
emerged to overcome the limitations of 'Direct 
method'. 
The Direct method (ØelÙe#e efJeefOe) of teaching, which is 
sometimes called the natural method and is often used 
in teaching foreign language. 
The quality of Direct method– 
– JÙeeKÙeeve kesâ yeerÛe ceW ØeMve hetbÚves keâer mJeleb$elee~ 
– ieefleefJeefOe mes Yeje ngDee~ 
– Úe$e Deelce megOeej~ 
– JÙeekeâjCe efveÙeceeW Éeje GheÙeesie veneR efmeKeeÙee peelee nw~ 
58. True or False answer type question is a type of 
............ question. 
 (a) Essay type 
(b) Objective type 
 (c) Descriptive type 
(d) Short answer type 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (b) True or False answer type question is a type 
of – 'Objective type' (Jemlegefve‰ question) Jemlegefve‰ hejer#eCe 
ØeeÙe: melÙe-DemelÙe Gòej, yengmebKÙekeâ ÛegveeJe efceueeve Ùee hetjkeâ ØeMveeW 
hej DeeOeeefjle nesleer nw efpevekeâes Megæ GòejeW keâer meneÙelee mes Debkeâve 
efkeâÙee peelee nw~ Mes<e efJekeâuhe Fme Øekeâej nQ– 
Essay type – efveyebOeelcekeâ 
Descriptive type – JeCe&veelcekeâ 
Short answer type – mebef#ehle Gòej 
59. Which of the following is a disadvantage of 
Situational Approach? 
 (a) It creates interest in teaching 
 (b) It is action based approach 
 (c) Text-books cannot be taught by this method 
 (d) Material aids are used in this approach 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (c) Situational Approach (efmLeeflepevÙe Âef°keâesCe) kesâ 
meboYe& ceW efMe#eCe keâer DeueeYekeâejer efmLeefle nw efkeâ 'Text-books 
cannot be taught by this method'. DeLee&led Text books keâes 
Fme efJeefOe ceW efMe#eCe veneR efkeâÙee pee mekeâlee nw~ Gòeâ keâLeve keâer hegef° 
efJekeâuhe (c) JÙeòeâ keâjlee nw pees Proper answer nw~ Mes<e efJekeâuhe 
Correct answer veneR nQ~ 
60. Which of the following is an advantage of 
Communicative Approach? 
 (a) It teaches ways of expression 
 
(b) It ignores grammar and structures of our 
languages 
 (c) Its practical utility is yet to be awaited 
 
(d) It is not properly and scientifically developed 
as yet 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (a) An advantage of communicative approach it 
teaches ways of expression. following are the 
advantages and disadvantages of communicative 
approach.   
Advantage 
Disadvantage 
–  This 
technique 
increases 
the 
teacher-student 
relationship. 
It 
is an interactive 
relationship.  
–  The student in 
this 
way 
can 
learn the target 
language in an 
enjoyable way. 
–  The 
requirement 
are 
difficult. 
Not 
all 
classrooms can allow for 
group work activities and 
for teaching aids and 
materials. 
–  The 
teacher 
should 
prepare the syllabus by 
taking students interest 
and needs into account. 
However, the energy and 
time of the teacher are 
limited. 
61. .............. is one of the chief characteristics of 
Communicative Approach. 
 (a) Examples are given to make the things clear 
 (b) It does not need trained teachers 
 
(c) Learner learns the target language as mother 
tongue 
 (d) Textbook plays an important role 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (a) In Communicative Approach, examples are 
given to make the things clear. 
Communicative Approach ceW concept keâes clear keâjves kesâ 
efueS real life situation based examples keâe use efkeâÙee peelee 
nw~ 
Communicative language teaching (CLT) or the 
communicative approach keâe goal, target language ceW 
communication (mebÛeej) keâjvee nw~  
62.  Which of the following methods of language 
learning and teaching is also known as the 
Berlitz method?  
 
(a) The Audio-lingual method  
 
(b) The Grammar translation method 
 
(c) The Direct method 
 
(d) The communicative Language Teaching 
UK TET (VI-VIII) 2020 
Ans. (c) : The Direct methods of language learning and 
teaching is also known as the Berlitz method. 
The Direct methods of teaching is the method of 
teaching directly without use of students mother tongue, 
without translation and without study of formal 
grammar.  
63.  A sound formed by the combination of two 
vowels in a single syllable, in which the sound 
begins as one vowel and moves towards 
another, is known as : 
 
(a) Diphthong 
(b) Bilabial 
 
(c) Penultimate syllable (d) Intonation 
UK TET (VI-VIII) 2020 
Ans. (a) : A sound formed by the combination of two 
vowels in a single syllable, in which the sound begins as 
one vowel and moves towards another, is known as – 
Diphthong. 
A Diphthong is a vowel in which the speaker's tongue 
changes position while it is being pronounce, so that the 
vowel sounds like a combination of two other vowels. 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 8 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
679 
YCT 
64.  The first important step in teaching is : 
 
(a) Planning of the presentation of topic of 
subject  
 
(b) Preparing effective teaching aids 
 
(c) Knowing the educational background of the 
students 
 
(d) Organizing the material to be taught 
UK TET (VI-VIII) 2020 
Ans. (c) : The first important step in teaching is 
knowing the educational background of the students. 
Here Option (c) will be correct answer.  
65.  Noam Chomsky's LAD is : 
 
(a) Language Acquisition Device 
 
(b) Language Adaptability Device 
 
(c) Linguistic Acquisition Detector 
 
(d) Linguistic Aptitude Detector 
UK TET (VI-VIII) 2020 
Ans. (a) : Noam Chomsky's LAD is : Language 
Acquisition Device 
Ûeecmekeâer keâes pesvesjsefšJe «eecej kesâ efmeæevle keâe Øeefleheeokeâ SJeb 20JeeR 
meoer kesâ Yee<ee efJe%eeve ceW meyemes yeÌ[e Ùeesieoevekeâlee&, ceevee peelee nw~ 
 The Language Acquisition Device (LAD) is a cairn 
from language acquisition research  proposed by Noam 
Chomsky's in the 1960. 
66. Grammar cum translation method is used in 
teaching: 
 (a) First language 
(b) Mother tongue 
 (c) Second language 
(d) All of these 
UK TET (VI-VIII) 2020 
Ans. (c) Grammar cum translation method is used as a 
Second language. This method which originally 
practices in our country. Grammar cum translation 
method keâes nce efÉleerÙe Yee<ee kesâ ™he ceW peeveles nQ~ cegKÙe ™he mes 
Ùen Method nceejs osMe ceW ØeÙeesie keâer peeleer nw~ 
FmeerefueS efJekeâuhe (c) GheÙegòeâ Gòej nesiee~ 
67. New Method of teaching English is developed 
by: 
 (A) I.K. Davies 
(b) B.S. Bloom 
 (c) Dr. West 
(d) None of these 
UK TET (VI-VIII) 2020 
Ans. (c) New Teaching Method, which is followed in 
the modern classroom. It was developed by Dr. West. 
FmeefueS efJekeâuhe (c) mener Gòej nw~  
68.  Poetry teaching is ..............  
 
(a) to learn poetic devices 
 
(b) for enjoyment and appreciation 
 
(c) to write a critical commentary 
 
(d) to learn words and phrases 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (b) : Poetry teaching is taught basically for 
enjoyment and appreciation. It lies in its ability to bring 
a fresh sense of life to language. It communicates 
through sounds as well as sight and words its magic by 
tone as well by engaging the eye.  
69.  A teacher divides her class into groups of four 
and reads out a text of about six sentences. 
Learners listen to and jot down important 
words and phrases. The teacher reads out the 
text the second time. Then learners discuss in 
groups the jotted down words and recreate the 
text nearer to the one read out by the teacher. 
What is this task know as ?  
 
(a) Mutual Dictation 
 
(b) Punctuation Dictation  
 
(c) Real Dictation 
 
(d) Composition Dictation 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (d) : Composition dictation is experiment with the 
transcription of spoken text in the hope that, by doing 
so, they will be nearer the goal of helping their students 
to write compositions one kind or another with as few 
mistakes as possible.  
70.  National Curriculum Framework 2005 assigns 
'supplementary' and 'complimentary' roles to 
English language. This means that :  
 
(a) English language teaching has nothing to do 
with teaching learning of other languages 
 
(b) English language teaching is a hindrance to 
learning of other languages 
 
(c) English language teaching violates the mother 
tongue based language education 
 
(d) English language teaching should support 
learning of other languages and subjects 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (d) : NCF 2005 assigns 'supplementary' and 
'complimentary' roles to English language means that 
English language teaching should support learning of 
other language and subjects.  
71.  Story telling as a strategy in language teaching 
is aimed at .........  
 
(a) learning to retell the story  
 
(b) engaging learners with language 
 
(c) testing the memory of learners 
 
(d) learning the morals 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
Ans. (b) : Story telling in language teaching is aimed at 
engaging 
learners 
with 
language 
and 
language 
formation.  
72.  Which is an effective way of teaching-learning 
grammar ?  
 
(a) Presenting grammar form in a natural 
discourse, then explaining how the form is 
made and used 
 
(b) Presenting single sentence examples in plenty 
of ways and then explaining the form 
 
(c) Teaching through a typical grammar book 
 
(d) Teaching the rules first followed by examples  
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
Ans. (a) : An effective way of teaching–learning 
grammar is presenting grammar form in a natural 
discourse then explaining how the form is made and used. 
There are following different method of teaching 
grammar. 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 9 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
680 
YCT 
1. Diagramming sentences 
2. Learning through writing 
3. Inductive teaching 
4. Deductive teaching 
5. Interactive teaching 
73.  According to National Curriculum Framework 
2005, which one of the following is NOT an 
objective of language teaching-learning ? 
 
(a) ability to read with comprehension 
 
(b) effortless expression 
 
(c) to know the history of languages 
 
(d) the competence to understand what one hears 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
Ans. (c) : According to National Curriculum 
Framework 2005, to know the history of languages is 
not an objective of language teaching–learning. The 
main objective of NCF 2005 are as follows– 
 Vocational Education 
 Improvement in teacher education 
 Improvement of thought of students 
 Competitive value of education. 
74.  Mother 
tongue 
based 
multilingualism 
advocates that 
 
(a) learners being their schooling in mother 
tongue and move on to add many (at least 
two) languages in school. 
 
(b) learners begin with their state language and 
more on to English medium  
 
(c) learners learn their mother tongue, Hindi and 
English from Class-I 
 
(d) all learners learn in mother tongue only in 
primary school. 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans. (a) : In National Curriculum Framework (2005) 
said that mother tongue based multilingualism in which 
learners begin their schooling in mother tongue and 
move onto add many (at least two) languages in school.  
75. 
Multilingualism as a resource means 
 
(a) using the languages of learners as a strategy 
in school. 
 
(b) teaching many language 
 
(c) promoting of language through content 
learning. 
 
(d) learning many language in school 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II July, 2019 
Ans : (a) Multilingualism as a resource means using the 
languages of learners as a strategy in school. Because 
N.C.F. (National curriculaum Frame work/2005 focused 
on either mother tongue or rural language or 
understandable language, which define multilingualism 
for a classroom. 
76. 
English does not find its place as a ............... 
 
(a) Second language in the school curriculum 
 
(b) Third language in the school curriculum 
 
(c) Medium of instruction 
 
(d) First language in the school curriculum 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II July, 2019 
Ans : (d) English does not find its place as a first 
language in the school curriculum because national 
curriculum framwork (N.C.F.) 2005 focused on the 
mainly mother tongue because learners/students can 
learn in mother tongue easily.  
77.  "at the initial stages of language learning, 
_________ may be one of the languages for 
learning activities that create the child's 
awareness to the world." (NCF–2005) 
 
(a) English 
(b) Vernacular language  
 
(c) Second language 
(d) Hindi 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2018  
Ans. (a) : According to NCF-2005, English may be one 
of the languages for learning activities that create the 
child's awareness to the world at the initial stage of 
language learning.  
78.  Which one of the following is not the objective 
defined by NCF–2005 for teaching English at 
upper primary level? 
 
(a) To negotiate their own learning goals and 
evaluate their own progress; edit, revise, 
review their own work 
 
(b) To use dictionary suitable to their needs  
 
(c) To be able to articulate individual/personal 
responses effectively 
 
(d) To promote learners' conceptualization of 
printed texts in terms of heading, paragraph 
and horizontal lines 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2018  
Ans. (d) : To promote learner's conceptulization of 
printed texts in terms of heading, paragraph and 
horizontal lines, is not the objective defined by NCF-
2005 for teaching English at upper level.  
79.  Grammar–translation method is basically used 
to teach– 
 
(a) grammar 
 
(b) foreign language  
 
(c) rules of any language usage 
 
(d) classical language 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2018  
Ans. (d) : Grammar–Translation method is an old 
(classical) method which was originally used to teach 
dead languages which explains why it focuses mainly 
on the written form at the expense of the oral form. It 
was designed according to the faculty psychology 
approach which was very popular during the 18th and 
19th century.  
80.  Little or no attention is given to pronunciation 
in ________ method. 
 
(a) audio–lingual 
(b) grammar–translation  
 
(c) CLT 
(d) SLT 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2018  
Ans. (b) : Little or no attention is given to 
pronunciation in grammar-translation method. 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 10 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
681 
YCT 
81.  Communicative Language Teaching replaced 
basically– 
 
(a) natural language processing 
 
(b) structural teaching  
 
(c) situational language teaching 
 
(d) motivational teaching 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2018  
Ans. (b) : The term Communicative Language Teaching 
covers a variety of approaches that focus on helping 
learners to communicate meaningfully in the target 
language. Communicative Language Teaching began in 
Britain in 1960s as a replacement to the earlier structural 
method, called Situational Language Teaching.  
82.  The method of teaching foreign language 
without using the pupil's first language is– 
 
(a) direct method 
 
(b) classical method  
 
(c) grammar–translation method 
 
(d) old method 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2018  
Ans. (a) : The direct method of teaching, which is 
sometimes called the natural method, and is often (but 
not exclusively) used in teaching foreign languages. 
refrains from using the learner's native language and 
used only the target language. In general teaching 
focuses on the development of oral skills.  
83. Mind-mapping helps the students to 
 
(a) use literary devices more effectively in their 
writing 
 (b) brainstorm, explore any idea and expand it 
 (c) learn passively each of the linguistic items 
 (d) memories the grammar rules 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2016  
Ans: (b) Mind-mapping means brainstorm exploring 
any idea and expanding it. This answer is marked at 
option (b) which is the only suitable answer of it. 
Other options give wrong inference. 
84. The concept of transformative generative 
grammar was given by 
 (a) Ferdinand Saussure (b) Bruner 
 (c) Noam Chomsky 
(d) Plaget 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2016  
Ans : (c) The concept of transformative generative  
grammar was given by – Noam Chomsky. Noam 
Chomsky is an American linguistic, philosopher and 
political activist. Hence option (c) is correct.  
85. Which of the following approaches/methods 
advocates 
linguistic 
competence 
and 
performance? 
 (a) Grammar translation method 
 (b) Communicative approach 
 (c) Direct method 
 (d) Structural approach 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2016  
Ans : (b) Communicative approach advocates 
linguistic 
competence 
and 
performance. 
The 
communicative approach emphasize interaction and 
problem solving as both the means and the ultimate 
goal of learning language. Hence option (b) is correct.   
86. Eclecticism in language teaching refers to using  
 
(a) appropriate strategies from various methods of 
teaching 
 (b) all the methods to teach language 
 (c) the best method of teaching 
 (d) technology to teach language 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2016  
Ans : (a) In Eclectic approach teacher following one 
specific methodology, the elective approach is the 
label given to a teacher's use of techniques and 
activities from a range of language teaching 
approaches and methologies. So option (a) satisfies 
above fact. Hence option (a) is correct.     
87. Grammar translation method of teaching 
English heavily relies on 
 (a) meaning focused teaching 
 (b) form-focused teaching 
 (c) direct teaching as a strategy for learning 
 (d) language use as the main focus  
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2016  
Ans : (b) Grammar Translation method is very much 
based on the written word and texts are widely in 
evidence. A typical approach would be to present the 
rules of a particular item of grammar. So this method 
of teaching English heavily relies on form focused 
teaching. Hence option (b) is correct.  
88. In order to have language proficiency, which 
one is not essentially required? 
 (a) Efficiency 
(b) Fluency 
 (c) Appropriacy 
(d) Accuracy 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (a) Fluency, Accuracy and Appropriacy are 
required but Efficiency is absurd. Hence option (a) 
would be correct. 
89. Constructivist approach to language learning 
promotes 
 (a) a child-centred approach 
 (b) classroom noise 
 (c) a teacher-centred approach 
 (d) culture of silence 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (a) Constructivist approach to language learning 
promotes a child-centred approach. Hence option (a) 
would be correct. 
90. Which of the following is not a prescribed level 
of teaching? 
 (a) Retention 
(b) Understanding 
 (c) Memory 
(d) Differentiation 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2015 
Ans : (d) Differentiation is not a prescribed level of 
teaching. Hence option (d). 
91. The Communicative Approach to teaching of 
language is related to 
 
(a) narrating the grammatical principles according 
to the needs of the audience 
 
(b) honing the abilities of listening, speaking, 
reading, writing and meaning-making 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 11 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
682 
YCT 
 
(c) teaching of grammar through principles of 
language and dictation 
 (d) teaching of language for written test 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2015 
Ans : (b) The communicative approach of language 
teaching involves honing the abilities of listening, 
speaking, reading, writing and meaning-making. 
Hence option (b). 
92. ……education is to use the student’s native 
language to teach some academic content while 
simultaneously providing an additional L2 
instruction. 
 (a) Basic 
(b) Humanistic 
 (c) Multilingual 
(d) Bilingual 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
Ans : (d) Bilingual education method can be used to 
provide academic as well as L2 (2nd language) 
instruction to the student in his native language. 
Hence option (d) is correct. 
93. The progress of teaching-learning of reading 
skills of a language over a certain period of time 
may be evaluated 
 (a) by asking students to read aloud a set text 
 (b) assessing students interpretation of the text 
 
(c) setting a reading task with a variety of test 
items 
 
(d) through students appreciation of stylistic 
devices 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
Ans : (c) The progress of teaching-learning skills of a 
language over a certain period of time may be setting 
a reading task with a variety of test items. Hence 
option (c) is correct. 
94. The ………..favours the exposure of students to 
a structure in different contexts that could allow 
them to apply the rules by themselves. 
 (a) direct method 
(b) inductive method 
 (c) deductive method (d) communicative approach 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
Ans : (b) The inductive method favours the exposure 
of students to a structure in different contexts that 
could allows them to apply the rules by themselves. 
Hence option (b) is correct. 
95. Emphasis on interaction as both the means and 
the ultimate goal of learning a language 
underlies the …..approach. 
 (a) comprehension 
(b) silent way 
 (c) immersion 
(d) communicative 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
Ans : (d) The communicative approach emphasizes 
on interaction as both means and the ultimate goal of 
learning a language. Hence option (d) is correct. 
96. The second language course is organized on 
elements of human society and the natural 
world, without relying on printed text. This is 
called the ……method. 
 (a) situational 
(b) natural 
 (c) grammar translation (d) language immersion 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
Ans : (b) In the Natural method, the second language 
course is organized on elements of human society and 
the natural world, without relying on printed text. 
Hence option (b) is correct. 
97. Pre-reading tasks are meant for 
 
(a) explaining the grammatical items used in the 
reading text 
 (b) evaluating the reading skill of the learners 
 
(c) giving the meanings of difficult words and 
phrases 
 
(d) introducing the main idea and motivating the 
learners 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Jan 2012 
Ans : (c) Pre-reading tasks are meant for giving the 
meanings of difficult words and phrases. Hence option 
(c) is correct. 
98. Affective factors in motivation are linked to 
students 
 (a) understanding successes and failures 
 (b) ability to complete a language task 
 (c) survival and safety needs 
 (d) own perceptions of their ability 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
Ans : (d) A student’s affective factors of motivation 
are related to their own perceptions of their ability. 
Hence option (d) would be correct. 
99. A class is reading a story based in a village. The 
teacher asks some students to mark the villagers 
in an outline map of their locality. Some other 
students are asked to collect information about 
the different crops grown in these villages. Yet 
another group works on the nutritional value of 
the grains, fruits and vegetables grown in the 
locality. Later the students exchange their work 
and have a class discussion, relating the 
information with the story. What is the 
underlying principle of this approach? 
 
(a) Making connections across disciplines and 
bringing out the inter-relatedness of knowledge 
 
(b) Teaching 
language 
through 
written 
assignments and projects 
 
(c) Giving importance to the practical and 
scholastic aspects of literary pieces 
 
(d) Treating knowledge in specific segments based 
on geography, science, language, etc. 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
Ans : (a) The underlying principle in this cross-
disciplinary approach is making connections across 
disciplines and bringing out the inter-relatedness of 
knowledge. Hence option (a). 
100. Vocabulary can be taught by using the following 
technique 
 (a) Usage 
(b) Direct 
 (c) Synonym 
(d) All of these 
UPTET (VI-VIII) Feb. 2014 
Ans: (d) Vocabulary can be taught by using all the 
above mentioned techniques. Hence option (d) would 
be correct. 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 12 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
683 
YCT 
101. Structural grammar emphasize 
 (a) word of sentence 
(b) phrase of sentence 
 (c) structure of sentence (d) All of these 
UPTET (VI-VIII) Feb. 2014 
Ans: (d) Structural grammar emphasizes on the 
words, phrases and structure of sentences. Hence 
option (d) would be correct. 
102. After reading a story on fish, if a teacher ask 
children to answer – 
 
"Imagine you are fish in a pond. What do you 
see around you?" This is an example of 
 (a) Multiple choice question 
 (b) Comprehension question 
 (c) Close type question 
 (d) Open-ended question 
UPTET (VI-VIII) DEC. 2016 
Ans : (d) Option (d) is correct. 
Open-ended question : An open-ended question is 
designed to encourage a full, meaningful answer using 
the subject's own knowledge and/or feelings. 
103. Which method is known as natural method? 
 (a) Direct method 
 
 (b) Grammar translation method 
 (c) Translation method 
 (d) Bilingual method 
UPTET (VI-VIII) DEC. 2016 
Ans : (a) Direct method is known as natural method 
in teaching learning process. Hence option (a) would 
be correct. 
Direct method– A system of teaching a foreign 
language using only that language and without 
emphasis on the study of grammar. 
104. 'Operation Black Board' is for 
 (a) Primary schools 
 (b) Middle schools 
 (c) Secondary schools 
 (d) Convent schools 
UPTET (VI-VIII) DEC. 2016 
Ans : (a) Operation Black Board is for Primary 
schools. Hence option (a) would be correct. 
Operation Black Board–The scheme of operation 
black board was launched in 1987 in pursuance of 
NPE-POA, to provide minimum essential facilities to 
all primary school in the country. 
105. Drills are considered important in which 
method? 
 (a) Translation Method (b) Grammar Method 
 (c) Bilingual Method 
(d) Pattern Practice 
UPTET (VI-VIII) Feb. 2016 
Ans : (d) Drills keâe DeLe& DeYÙeeme neslee nw efpemekeâe ØeÙeesie 
Pattern Practice kesâ efueS efkeâÙee peelee nw~ Dele: efoÙes ieÙes ØeMve 
keâe Gòej efJekeâuhe (d) nw~ DevÙe efJekeâuheeW ceW Ùen efJeefOe keâejiej lees 
nw hej Gleveer cenlJehetCe& veneR~  
106. Which method is based on the theory “from 
example to generalization”? 
 (a) Deductive Method 
 (b) Inductive Method 
 (c) Inductive Deductive Method 
 (d) Incidental Method 
UPTET (VI-VIII) Feb. 2014 
Ans: (b) The Induction method is based on the theory 
of ‘specific example to generalization.’ Hence option 
(b) would be correct. 
C. 
ROLE OF LISTENING 
AND SPEAKING; 
FUNCTION OF 
LANGUAGE AND HOW 
CHILDREN USE IT AS A 
TOOL 
 
107.  A teacher arranges her learners into pairs and 
give them a text of two paragraphs. One 
learner in the pair reads out the text to the 
other and the partner takes the dictation. Then 
the process is reversed. What is this known as? 
 
(a) Running dictation  
 
(b) Composition dictation  
 
(c) Jig-saw dictation 
 
(d) Partial dictation 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (d) : 'Partial dictation'. In this kind of dictation, 
words, phrases or chunks of language have been deleted 
and students are required to listen and write down the 
missing words. Pair work is encouraged.   
108.   Words which one recognizes when one hears 
or sees them are _________ 
 
(a) Explicit vocabulary  
 
(b) Implicit vocabulary  
 
(c) Productive vocabulary 
 
(d) Receptive vocabulary 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (d) : 'Receptive vocabulary' If you understand the 
meaning of a word when you hear or read it. It is a part 
of your receptive vocabulary. Hence, option 'd' is the 
correct answer.   
109.  Which of the following statements are true of 
languages in India? 
 
(a) English is the official language of India. 
 
(b) Hindi is the national language of India. 
 
(c) Hindi is the official language of India 
 
(d) English is the associate official language of 
India.  
 
(a) 'a' and 'b' are true. 
(b) 'b' and 'c' are true.  
 
(c) 'a' and 'b' are true 
(d) 'c' and 'd' are true 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (d) : ''c' and 'd' are true'. Hindi is the official 
language of India and English is the associate official 
language of India. Hence, option 'd' is correct.   
110.  A reader gets the hints based on sound-symbol 
correspondences to decode and comprehend 
the text. What is this known as?  
 
(a) Metalinguistic cues (b) Syntactic cues  
 
(c) Graphic cues 
(d) Graphophonic cues  
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 13 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
684 
YCT 
Ans. (d) : Graphophonic cues involve the letter sound 
or sound symbol relationships of language. Readers 
identifying unknown words by relating speech sounds 
to letters or letter patterns are using graphophonic cues. 
This process is often called 'decoding'.  
111.  India's language-in-education policy is known 
as.......  
 
(a) Language in education  
 
(b) Official language policy  
 
(c) National language formula 
 
(d) Three language formula 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (d) : 'Three language formula' Three language 
formula (Kothari commission 1968).  
First Language: It will be the mother tongue or 
regional language. 
Second Language: In Hindi speaking states, it will be 
other modern Indian language or English. In non-Hindi 
speaking states, it will be Hindi or English.  
Third Language: It is a non-native language by 
learners.  
112.  What is the status given to English by the 
Indian Constitution?   
 
(a) National Language  
 
(b) Link Language  
 
(c) Official Language 
 
(d) Associate Office Language 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (d) : 'Associate office language'. There is no 
national language in India. There are various official 
languages in India at the state/territory level. The 
business in Indian parliament can only be transacted in 
Hindi or in English. English is allowed to be used in 
official purposes such as parliamentary proceedings, 
judiciary, 
communications 
between 
the 
central 
government and a state government.   
113.  A teacher of class VIII discussed 'determiners' 
in her classroom through a short text in which 
determiners occur many times and learners 
were made to notice them in use. This was 
followed by learners using the same in their 
own language for particular purposes. Teacher 
then brought to the notice of  the learners, the 
uses of determiners in contexts. What strategy 
did the teacher employ in her classroom? 
 
(a) Task based language teaching  
 
(b) Communical language teaching  
 
(c) Structured teaching 
 
(d) Consciousness raising 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (d) : Consciousness-raising is an approach to 
language teaching, to raise something to consciousness 
means to make someone aware of something about the 
language that they might not notice on their own.   
114.  Which typology of question does the following 
question belong to ?  
 
 Imagine you are the narrator of the story. 
Write an entry in your diary about your 
experiences in about 100 words. 
 
(a) Inferential question 
 
(b) Cloze question 
 
(c) Extrapolative question 
 
(d) Informative question 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (c) : When you make an extrapolation, you take 
facts and observations about a present or known 
situation and use them to make prediction about what 
might eventually happen.    
115.  Transactional listening : 
 
(a) lays emphasis on harmonious communication 
in the social context 
 
(b) does not require careful attention to details 
and facts 
 
(c) is interactive by nature 
 
(d) lays emphasis on conveying information 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
Ans. (d) : Transactional listening, which is associated 
with accessing information through the spoken word, 
through listening to broadcast news announcements 
lectures etc. So learners need to develop both skills in 
deciphering the message and social skills which lays 
emphasis on conveying information. 
116.  A teacher draws the attention of learners to 
individual sounds, words and then sentences 
while teaching the listening skill. What 
approach to listening does the teacher adopt? 
 
(a) Elastic approach 
 
(b) Communicative approach 
 
(c) Bottom-up approach 
 
(d) Top-down approach 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans. (c) : A bottom-up reading model focused on a 
single direction part-to- whole processing of a text. A 
reader reads through an article in a newspaper to get the 
overall idea of the article. 
117. Bottom-up processing in listening is to : 
 
(a) decode the overall messages of the discourse 
and move down the micro level units 
 
(b) encode all the sounds from speaker to listener 
 
(c) use multiple ways to decode the messages 
 
(d) decode messages moving from sounds to 
words, 
phrases, 
clauses 
and 
other 
grammatical elements to sentences 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II July, 2019 
Ans : (d) Bottom-up processing in also known as data 
driven processing that is an explanation for perception 
that involves starting with an incoming stimulus and 
working overall messages. Bottom-up processing in 
listening is to decode messages moving from sounds to 
words, phrases, clauses and other grammatical elements 
to sentences. 
118.  If a language teacher has put the words 'school, 
teacher, headmaster, peon' in a group, then she 
is following– 
 
(a) lexical grouping  
 
(b) semantic grouping  
 
(c) phonetic grouping 
 
(d) grammatical grouping 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2018  
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 14 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
685 
YCT 
Ans. (b) : If a language teacher has put the words 
'school, teacher, headmaster, peon' in a group, then she 
is following semantic grouping.  
119.  Language laboratory is the place where the 
learners have to listen on headphone. Thor 
language labs are set up with a view to provide 
listening activities in order to develop– 
 
(a) analysis habit 
(b) speech habit  
 
(c) criticizing habit 
(d) listening activities 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2018  
Ans. (b) : Thor language labs are set up with a view to 
provide listening activities in order to develop speech 
habit. 
120.  Which of the following are structural words? 
 
(a) Auxiliaries 
(b) Prepositions  
 
(c) Conjunctions 
(d) All of the above 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2018  
Ans. (d) : Auxiliaries, Prepositions, conjuctions, All are 
structural words.  
121. Interactive listening means listening 
 (a) carefully for word stress and intonation 
 (b) to judge the speaker's mood and tone 
 (c) carefully to what is said and responding 
 (d) curiously to what is said 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2016  
Ans: 
(b) 
Interactive 
listening 
indicates 
the 
understanding of speaker's mood and tone. This 
answer is clearly interpreted in option (b) to judge the 
speaker's mood and tone which is the only judicious 
answer. Other options are wrong. 
122. Mrudusrnita, while teaching a lesson on atoms 
from the science textbook, gave her students 
activities based on the theme. The activities 
included vocabulary and debate on the uses of 
atomic energy. What is this strategy known as? 
 (a) Language across curriculum 
 (b) Language in other subjects 
 (c) Language in science 
 (d) Language through science 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2016  
Ans: (a) The activity based on theme including 
vocabulary and debate on a subject as a strategy 
known as "Language across curriculum". Hence 
option (a) is right.  
123. Which of the following activities needs to be 
taken care of for helping non-native speakers to 
produce the sounds of the target language? 
 
(a) Imitating the way a native speaker produces 
sounds 
 
(b) Distinguishing the vowel from consonant 
sounds 
 
(c) Ensuring that the words spoken are intelligible 
to others 
 (d) Maintaining the regional interference 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2016  
Ans : (d) 'Maintaining the regional interference' 
activities needs to be taken care of for helping non-
native speakers to produce the sounds of the target 
language. Hence option (d) is correct.  
124. According to which one of the following 
linguists, language cannot be sub-standard; it 
may be non-standard? 
 (a) William Labov 
(b) Basil Bernstein 
 (c) Stephen Krashen 
(d) Chomsky 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (a) According to William Labov language 
cannot be sub-standard but may be non-standard. 
Hence option (a) would be correct. 
125. Which one of the following is not a language 
component? 
 (a) Structure 
(b) Sound 
 (c) Script 
(d) Vocabulary 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (c) Script is not a language component as it is 
hand written symbol representing a sound but is itself 
not a sound. Hence option (c) would be correct. 
126. Which of the following considers words and 
word chunks as basis for language learning? 
 (a) Grammar translation method 
 (b) Dictionary approach 
 (c) Word approach 
 (d) Lexical approach 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2015 
Ans : (d) Lexical approach considers words and word 
chunks as basis for language learning. Hence option 
(d) is correct. 
127. What is the status of English in India? 
 (a) a regional language 
 (b) a foreign language 
 (c) an associate official language 
 (d) the official language 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2015 
Ans : (c) In India English is an associate official 
language. Hence option (c). 
128. Learning a language involves the processes of 
listening, speaking, reading and writing. These 
processes involve 
 (a) linguistic aspect 
 (b) psychological aspect 
 (c) Either (a) or (b) 
 (d) Both (a) and (b) 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
Ans : (d) Learning a language involves both linguistic 
and psychological aspects. Hence option (d) is correct. 
129. When students work in pairs or groups, they 
just end up chatting in their own language. This 
can be over come/monitored by 
 (a) increasing the difficulty level of task 
 
(b) instructions for the task and objectives to be 
made clear first 
 (c) giving an easy task, so that they may chat less 
 
(d) writing notes on the board, so that they will not 
use L 1 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 15 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
686 
YCT 
Ans : (b) When students work in pairs or groups, 
practical difficulties like chatting can be monitored by 
clarifying the objectives of the task first along with 
proper instructions for the task. Hence option (b) is 
correct. 
130. Two competency areas, which give a language 
learner in progress the ability to communicate 
competently are 
 (a) audio and expressive 
 (b) grammar and phonetic 
 (c) linguistic and socio-cultural 
 (d) discourse and accent 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
Ans : (c) Two competency areas which aid a language 
learner in progress are linguistic and socio-cultural 
areas. Hence option (c) is correct. 
131. A subject-centered approach is where learning 
experiences are organized around 
 (a) student’s interests 
 (b) teacher’s subject competency 
 (c) course content 
 (d) educational technology 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July 2013 
Ans : (c) In subject-centered approach learning 
experiences are organized around course content. 
Hence option (c) would be correct. 
132. Constructivism is a theory where students 
 
(a) study a variety of dissimilar samples and draw 
a well founded conclusion 
 
(b) form their own understanding and knowledge 
of the world, through experiencing things and 
reflecting on those experiences 
 
(c) are facilitated by the teacher and use a variety 
of media to research and create their own 
theories 
 
(d) construct their own learning aids, thereby 
gaining hands-on experience 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July 2013 
Ans : (b) Constructivism is a theory where students 
form their own understanding and knowledge of the 
world through experiencing things and reflecting on 
those experiences. Hence option (b) would be correct. 
133. Speaking skill can be best developed by enabling 
the learners to 
 (a) avoid all errors, while speaking 
 (b) read challenging and difficult texts 
 (c) communicate in real-life situations 
 (d) listen to the model provided by the teacher 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Jan 2012 
Ans : (d) Speaking skill is developed in learners by 
model reading by the teacher. Hence option (d) is 
correct. 
134. Seating arrangement should be flexible in a 
language classroom because 
 
(a) it helps learners change their places frequently 
 
(b) it facilitates pair work and group work 
 
(c) it reduces the responsibility of the teacher 
 
(d) it helps the teacher in maintaining discipline 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Jan 2012 
Ans : (c) In a language class seating arrangement 
should be flexible as it reduces the responsibility of 
the teacher. Hence option (c) is correct. 
135. Constructivism is a theory where students 
 
(a) form their own understanding and knowledge 
of the world, through experiencing things and 
reflecting on those experiences 
 
(b) construct their own learning aids, thereby 
gaining hands-on experience 
 
(c) study a variety of dissimilar samples and draw 
a well founded conclusion 
 
(d) are facilitated by the teacher and use a variety 
of media to research and create their own 
theories 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
Ans : (a) Constructivism is a theory in which students 
form their own understanding and knowledge of the 
world by reflecting on those experiences. Hence 
option (a) would be correct. 
136. Which is not a teacher-centered instruction? 
 (a) Modelling 
 
(b) Lecture 
 (c) Individualized instruction (d) Demonstration 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
Ans : (c) Individualized instruction is student centre. 
Hence option (c) would be correct. 
137. An effective lesson for teaching a language 
begins with 
 (a) presenting the content of the lesson 
 
(b) recapitulation and motivation through fun 
activity 
 (c) writing on the blackboard 
 (d) listing the learning objectives of the lesson 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
Ans : (a) An effective lesson for teaching a language 
begins with presenting the content of the lesson. 
Hence option (a). 
138. In large language classes, group work can be 
accomplished by 
 (a) asking students to turn around for group work 
 (b) asking all students to stand in a circle 
 
(c) asking half the class to go out to the 
playground 
 
(d) asking 4-5 students to sit together on a narrow 
bench despite lack of space 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
Ans : (a) Group work in large classes is accomplished 
by asking students to turn around for group work. 
Hence option (a). 
139. Which of the following is best suited for 
improving the speaking skills of learners? 
 (a) Reading a prose and drama aloud 
 (b) Oral language drill 
 
(c) Debates and group discussions followed by 
role play 
 (d) Recitation of poetry 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 16 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
687 
YCT 
Ans : (c) Debates, group discussions and role play 
exercises are best suited for improving learner’s 
speaking skills. Hence option (c). 
140. Choose the appropriate answer. 
 
What is the bitter truth of school education in 
India? 
 (a) High quality teaching and learning 
 
(b) Emphasis on memorization and completing a 
pre-determined syllabus 
 
(c) Government and private schools are equally good 
 
(d) Every child in school is paid attention for his 
growth 
UPTET (VI-VIII) June, 2013 
Ans : (c) There is a huge gap between the quality of 
education in government and private schools. 
This is the bitter truth of school education in India. 
Hence option (c) would be correct. 
D. 
CRITICAL PERSPECTIVE 
ON THE ROLE OF 
GRAMMER IN 
LEARNING A LANGUAGE 
FOR COMMUNICATING 
IDEAS VERBALLY AND 
IN WRITTEN FORM 
 
141.  'Declarative knowledge' in learning grammar 
refers to _______.  
 
(a) knowing the ideas and concepts in learning.  
 
(b) knowing to use a dictionary  
 
(c) knowing the rules of a grammatical item. 
 
(d) knowing how to do a grammatical item. 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (c) : 'knowing the rules of a grammatical item'. 
Declarative knowledge means establishing knowledge 
of grammar rules or pattern in the learner's mind. 
Hence, option 'c' is correct.   
142.  'Pedagogical Grammar' means that ________  
 
(a) Begin from form and move on to use  
 
(b) Teaching through immersion  
 
(c) All grammar teaching should be rule focussed 
 
(d) Teaching grammar in context 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (d) : Pedagogical grammar is grammatical analysis 
and instruction designed for second language students, 
also called teaching grammar.   
143.  Knowing a word means :  
 
(a) how the word is spelt 
 
(b) who speaks the word 
 
(c) to know to write the word 
 
(d) how, where and when it is used 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (d) : Knowing a word means how, where and 
when it is used.  
144.  Which one of the following is NOT an 
assessment tool for language learning ?  
 
(a) Portfolio 
(b) Assignment 
 
(c) Realia 
(d) Observation schedule 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
Ans. (c) : Realia is not an assessment tool for language 
learning, It refers to the practice of using real, tangible 
things in the classroom to help students connect with 
English on different levels. It involves visual, tactile and 
functional methods for teaching ideas, concepts, 
vocabulary or grammar.  
145.  Which one of the following is NOT true of 
language learning ? 
 
(a) Grammatical rules are important for learning 
a language 
 
(b) Language learning takes time 
 
(c) Language learning needs a context 
 
(d) Reading is making meaning 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
Ans. (a) : In language learning–reading is meaningful. 
So, It will take time in learning and for reading needs of 
a appropriate context. There is no any importance 
grammatical rules for learning a language.  
146.  A teacher asks her learners to find words and 
words chunks relating to different themes 
based on the reading lesson. Learners in groups 
have to make word charts of the same category. 
What is this strategy known as? 
 
(a) Word collocations 
 
(b) Communicative language teaching  
 
(c) A writing project 
 
(d) Thematic language teaching 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans. (a) : Word collocations, A collocation is two or 
more words that often go together. Naturally learning 
collocations is essential for making english sound fluent 
and natural. 
Example– The word 'great' is often use in collacations 
with feeling or quality. 
Great
Feeling
+
 
Great admiration 
Great anger 
Great enjoyment 
Great
Quality
+
 
Great power 
Great pride 
Great strength 
147.  A teacher keeps the students' work of language 
use and uses it for assessing the learners' 
achievement. 
What 
is 
this 
strategy 
for 
assessment known as? 
 
(a) Diagnostic test 
 
(b) CCE  
 
(c) Summative assessment 
 
(d) Portfolio assessment 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 17 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
688 
YCT 
Ans. (d) : Portfolio assessment is regular work of the 
learner's over a period of time. It also provides a 
cumulative read of growth and development of a skill of 
competence in an area over a period of time. 
Student becomes an active participant in the learning 
and assessement process.  
148. Continuous Assessment focuses on :  
 
(a) Informal assessment 
 
(b) Informal 
and 
a 
combination 
of 
both 
formative and summative 
 
(c) Outcome and achievement based assessment 
 
(d) Formal assessment 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans : (b) Continuous assessement means assessing 
aspects of learners language throught their courses and 
then producing a final evaluation results from these 
assessements. which focuses on informal and a 
combination of both formative and summative. 
149.  Which of the following statements are true of 
teaching of grammar? 
 
 A. Teaching of rules at the initial stage does 
 
not lend much to language learning. 
 
 B. Rules of grammar are essential during the 
 
formative years of language learning. 
 
 C. Grammar teaching should move from 
 
meaning to form. 
 
 D. Grammar teaching should move from form 
 
to meaning. 
 
(a) Statements C and B are true 
 
(b) Statements A and C are true  
 
(c) Statements A and D are true 
 
(d) Statements B and D are true 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans. (b) : Statement A and C are true of teaching of 
grammer. Teaching of grammer, teaching of rules at the 
initial stage does not lend much to language learning 
and grammar teaching should move from  meaning to 
form. To develop student's insight into the structures of 
English language. 
150.  Sight words are developed 
 
(a) by teachers from text books 
 
(b) by using words in meaningful contexts  
 
(c) by knowing meanings of difficult words 
 
(d) by seeing them on sight. 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans. (b) : Sight wods are developed by using words in 
meaningful contexts 
151.  Inquiry–based curriculum is based on– 
 
(a) deductive reasoning (b) inductive reasoning  
 
(c) heuristic reasoning (d) analogical reasoning 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2018  
Ans. (c) : Inquiry-based curriculum is based heuristic 
reasoning. 
A heuristic method is an approach to finding a solution 
to a problem. It is about using a practical method that 
doesn't necessarily need to be perfect.  
152.  When a teacher used realia to teach vocabulary 
and grammar, she is–  
 
(a) using role play as a learning device 
 
(b) using real objects, actions and real–life 
situations  
 
(c) using computer technology 
 
(d) teaching through true stories 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2018  
Ans. (b) : When a teacher used realia to teach 
vocabulary and grammar, she is using real objects, 
actions and real-life situations.  
153. Pedagogical Grammar is : 
 
(a) grammar for teachers 
 
(b) grammar in context to connect grammar 
points with real life context 
 
(c) grammar with formal rules to be applied 
while writing 
 
(d) grammar of pedagogy 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II July, 2019 
Ans : (b) A pedagogical grammar is a description how 
to use the grammar of  a language to communicate for 
people wanting to learn the target language. It can be 
compared with a reference grammar which just 
describes languages grammar. It is a grammar in 
context to connect grammar points with real life 
context. 
154.  Which one of the following does not affect the 
intonation? 
 
(a) Voice/Pronunciation (b) Tone  
 
(c) Rhythm 
(d) Loudness 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2018  
Ans. (a) : Voice/Pronunciation does not affect the 
intonation. 
Intonation is a feature of pronunciation and common to 
all languages, other features of pronuciation includes 
stress, rhythm, connected speech and accent. At its 
simplest, intonation could be described as 'the music of 
speech'. A change or variation in this music (or pitch) 
can affect the meaning of what we say.  
155. Grammatical structures can be practiced in a 
controlled manner by 
 
(a) correcting wrong sentences written by the 
learners 
 (b) doing composition exercise 
 (c) explaining the use of particular structures 
 (d) gap-filling grammar exercise 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2016  
Ans: (c) Grammatical structures can be practiced in a 
controlled manner by detailing the use of particular 
structures. This answer is clearly indicated in option 
(c) which is the only right answer. 
156. In free writing, a learner is engaged in 
 
(a) writing sentences without applying her/his 
mind 
 
(b) expressing ideas without giving much attention 
to spelling and grammar 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 18 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
689 
YCT 
 
(c) listing out the things she/he has just 
memorized 
 
(d) writing with specific relation to spelling and 
grammar 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2016  
Ans: (b) The free writing means ‘expressing idea 
without giving much attention to spelling and 
grammar’. This answer is indicated at option (b). 
Hence it is the only correct answer. 
157. Cognitive code approach focuses more on 
 (a) vocabulary 
(b) pronunciation 
 (c) spelling 
(d) grammar rules 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (d) Cognitive code approach focused more on 
grammer rules. Hence option (d) would be correct. 
158. If a teacher wants to develop the understanding 
of a text among her class students, what will be 
the best method? 
 
(a) Making students to tick the answer in the 
textbook 
 
(b) Asking students to pay attention to the 
classroom 
 (c) Asking questions 
 (d) Writing answers on the blackboard 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2015 
Ans : (c) The best method for developing the 
understanding of a text among students be – asking 
questions. Hence option (c). 
159. Communicative competence is a subset of 
functional grammar and its approach in 
teaching will allow students to 
 
(a) learn 
grammar 
through 
meaningful 
communication 
 
(b) enable teachers expose, students to grammar in 
the lower classes 
 (c) learn structures and, use them accurately 
 (d) use structures in a range of output texts 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
Ans : (a) In functional grammar the approach of 
communicative competence allows the students to 
learn grammar through meaningful communication. 
Hence option (a) is correct. 
160. Considering 
learning 
styles 
broadens 
the 
approaches taken in the management of 
language-related 
problems. 
Some 
students 
prefer to get new information in written 
directions or verbal information. Their learning 
style is 
 (a) auditory 
(b) visual 
 (c) kinesthetic 
(d) manipulative 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
Ans : (b) Getting new information in written 
directions or verbal information is visual learning 
style. Hence option (b) is correct. 
161. Integrating semantic function as a part of 
grammar instruction requires students to focus on 
 
(a) drills for the practice of grammatical structures 
 
(b) building fluency use rather than grammatical 
correctness 
 (c) accuracy of grammer use in syntax formation 
 
(d) communication of meaning and accuracy of 
language 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
Ans : (d) Integrating semantic function as a part of 
grammar instruction requires students to focus on 
communication of meaning and accuracy of language. 
Hence option (d) is correct. 
162. Teaching grammar is useful to improve 
 
(a) numeracy 
(b) accuracy 
 
(c) fluency 
(d) literacy 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Jan 2012 
Ans : (d) English grammar is the most important 
factor in improving the literacy of students. Hence 
option (d) is correct. 
163. Fluency in English can be developed through 
 (a) the teacher talking for most of the time 
 
(b) the teacher being alert to spot the errors and 
correct them 
 
(c) allowing students who are not confident to 
have the freedom to be quiet 
 
(d) creating opportunities to use the target 
language for communication 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
Ans : (d) Fluency in English can be developed 
through creating opportunities to use the target 
language for communication. Hence option (d). 
164. Which is not a quality of good handwriting? 
 (a) Legibility 
 
 (b) Distinctiveness 
 (c) Spacing 
 (d) Absence of uniformity in the size of letters 
UPTET (VI-VIII) June, 2013 
Ans : (d) Absence of uniformity in the size of letters 
is a bad quality of hand writing. Hence option (d) 
would be correct. 
165. Which one is regarded as the best style of 
writing? 
(a) Vertical 
(b) Irregular 
(c) Froward 
(d) Horizontal 
UPTET (VI-VIII) Feb. 2014 
Ans: (a) Vertical style of writing scripts is the best. 
Hence option (a) would be correct. 
E. 
LANGUAGE SKILLS 
 
166.  'Mechanics' of language in speaking skills 
includes_______.  
 
(a) social and cultural rules of using language  
 
(b) script, words and sentences  
 
(c) pronunciation, grammar and vocabulary 
 
(d) Clarity of message 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (c) : According to Harris (1974) there are five 
components 
of 
speaking 
skill 
concerned 
with 
comprehension, grammar, vocabulary, pronunciation 
and fluency. Hence option 'c' is the correct answer.   
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 19 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
690 
YCT 
167.  What does 'free-writing approach' to writing 
promote?  
 
(a) Understanding of the content and fluency  
 
(b) Syntax and language use  
 
(c) Understanding of form and accuracy 
 
(d) Grammatical accuracy 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (a) : Free writing is a useful technique whereby 
you write down your thoughts as they come to you, 
without regard for grammar, syntax or any other rules of 
writing.   
168.  What does fluency in reading mean?  
 
(a) Ability to interpret the text. 
 
(b) Ability to read without any grammatical 
errors  
 
(c) Ability to read a text at ease with expression. 
 
(d) Ability to read a text without any mistake at 
all 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (c) : 'Ability to read a text at ease with expression'. 
Fluency is derived from the word 'fluens' which 'means 
to flow' fluent reading is defined as 'the ability to read 
expressively and meaningfully, as well as. 
169.  A teacher asks her learners of class VIII to 
read a novel by Indian author and asks them to 
write an essay giving their views on the novel. 
What is this known as a reading activity. 
 
(a) Reading for information 
 
(b) Scanning 
 
(c) Intensive reading 
 
(d) Extensive reading 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (d) : 'extensive reading'.  
Extensive Reading : Extensive reading is free reading 
or reading for pleasure is a way of language learning, 
including foreign language learning. It increases 
including foreign language learning. It increases 
motivation through positive effective benefits.  
170. Who of the following proposed Listening-
Speaking-Writing-Reading order teaching for 
learning English as foreign language? 
 (A) E. C. Kittson 
(b) Robert Paul 
 (c) J. A. Bright 
(d) P. Gurrey 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
 Ans. (d) P. Gurrey proposed Listening-Speaking-
Writing-Reading [LSWR] order teaching for learning 
English as foreign language. 
These four abilities of learning are a group of four 
capabilities that enables a person to grasp, follow, 
know and understand the expected subject or topic. 
Mes<e efJekeâuhe answer kesâ efueS GheÙegòeâ veneR nQ~ 
171. Linguistic variability or multilingualism is a 
............... to acquire the knowledge of a foreign 
language.  
 (a) boon 
(b) hardship 
 (c) tool 
(d) ladder 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (c) Linguistic variability (Yee<eeF& heefjJele&veMeeruelee) Ùee 
Multilingualism (yengYee<Ùelee) foreign language keâes meerKeves 
kesâ efueS Skeâ tool (meeOeve) keâe keâeÙe& keâjleer nw~ 
Hence option (c) is correct. 
172.  Which of the following language skills may be 
considered as the consumption skills?  
 
(a) Listening and reading 
 
(b) Reading and writing 
 
(c) Speaking and listening 
 
(d) Writing and speaking 
UK TET (VI-VIII) 2020 
Ans. (a) : 'Listening and reading' language skills may 
be considered as the consumption skills. 
he"ve (Reading) – keâe leelheÙe& efueKes ngS Ùee printed 
MeyoeW keâes osKeves leLee mecePeves mes nw, Fmemes megveves SJeb yeesueves keâer 
keâuee keâe Yeer efJekeâeme neslee nw~ 
173. Pronunciation is related to: 
 (a) Vocabulary 
(b) Speaking 
 (c) Intonation 
(d) All of these 
UK TET (VI-VIII) 2020 
Ans. (d) efoÙes ieÙes efJekeâuheeW ceW mes Vocabulary (Meyo keâes<e), 
Speaking (yeesuevee), Intonation (memJej hee") meYeer Words 
Pronunciation (GÛÛeejCe) kesâ Devleie&le Deeles nQ~ FmeerefueS 
efJekeâuhe (d) mener Gòej nesiee~ 
174.  What status is given to English language in the 
Indian Constitution ?  
 
(a) Associate official language 
 
(b) Official language 
 
(c) Foreign language 
 
(d) Recognised language 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
Ans. (a) : According to the Indian constitution, English 
is an Associate official language or an associate 
additional language. 
An associate language is a type of language in which 
language associate person teaches how to speak a 
language. provides with language data which helps to 
do linguistic research. 
175.  CALP stands for  
 
(a) Cognitively Advanced Language Proficiency 
 
(b) Competency 
based 
Academic 
Language 
Proficiency 
 
(c) Comparative Academic Language Proficiency 
 
(d) Cognitively Academic Language Proficiency 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
Ans. (a) : CALP stands for Cognitively Advanced 
Language Proficiency. It is a language related term 
developed by Jim Cummins which refers to formal 
academic learning.   
176.  LAC stands for : 
 
(a) Languages Across the Cultures 
 
(b) Language Acquisition of Content  
 
(c) Language Across the Curriculum 
 
(d) Language Acquisition Culture 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 20 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
691 
YCT 
Ans. (c) : LAC stand for : Language Across the 
Curriculum   
177.  Many minor and tribal languages are not 
available in school curriculum and the number 
of speakers is receding in those languages. 
What is this known as in socio educational 
linguistics? 
 
(a) Language minority in education 
 
(b) Language endangerment  
 
(c) Language revival 
 
(d) Language death 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans. (b) : Language endangerment– An endangered 
languge is a language that is at risk of no longer being 
used, as its speakers shift to another language or die out. 
Language endangement is a serious concern. For a 
variety of reasone, speakers of many smaller, less 
dominant languages stop using their haritage language 
and being using a more dominant language. Parents 
may being to use only that more dominant language 
with their children and thus the intergenerational 
transmission of the heritage language is stopped. 
178. A teacher asks her learners of class–VII to 
refer to the textbook of History and find a 
theme which can be connected with English 
language text for writing an essay. 
 
What is this practice known as ? 
 
(a) Language across the curriculum 
 
(b) Language in learning 
 
(c) Language and history integrated learning 
 
(d) Language and Social Science learning 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II July, 2019 
Ans : (a) Language across the curriculum is a modern 
concept that a foregin or second language should be 
tought outof the tradiditional language classroom by 
using contextual and content based language teaching 
methodologies throughout the school hours. 
It is a referal concept that help learners to learn English 
language from any textbook as History, Geography etc. 
179. Sanskrit in India today is a : 
 
(a) Modern Indian language and a classical 
language 
 
(b) Religious language 
 
(c) Hindu language 
 
(d) Modern Indian language 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II July, 2019 
Ans : (a) Sanskrit in India today is a Modern Indian 
language and a classical language. 
180.  Conventions of writing include– 
 
(a) story ideas 
(b) proper punctuation  
 
(c) imagination 
(d) good vocabulary 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2018  
Ans. (b) : Conventions of writing includes proper 
punctuation, spelling, grammar, and sentence structure.  
181.  During reading, if a student is piercing 
information together as they read a text 
keeping track of what is happening, he/she is–  
 
(a) inferring 
(b) skimming  
 
(c) paraphrasing 
(d) synthesizing 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2018  
Ans. (d) : During reading, if a student is piercing 
information together as they read a text keeping track of 
what is happening, he/she is synthesizing. 
Synthesize means–to produce a substance by artificial 
means; to produce sounds, music or speech using 
electronic equipment.  
182. Susheela discussed a short story in the 
classroom and asked her students to write an 
article for a newspaper on the theme of the 
story. What is the writing known as? 
 (a) Long answer 
 (b) Short essay 
 (c) Writing for a newspaper 
 (d) extrapolative writing 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2016  
Ans: (d) Discussing a short story and asking students 
to write an article for a news paper on the theme of the 
story is known as extrapolative writing. This answer is 
indicated at option (d) which is the only suitable 
answer. Other options give wrong meaning. 
183. While listening to a speech in English, 
sometimes we listen to basic unit of a sound, a 
syllable and a word, then a sentence and then a 
paragraph to decode the meaning of the 
complete speech. This mental process can be 
described as 
 (a) Bottom up approach 
 (b) Middle-path approach 
 (c) Interactive model 
 (d) Top-down approach 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2016  
Ans: (b) The mental process of listening to a basic 
unit of a sound a syllable and word then a sentence 
and then a paragraph to decode the meaning of the 
complete speech is known as "Middle-path approach. 
Hence option (b) is the right answer of the question. 
184. Yasmin, an English language teacher, gave her 
students group work to explore an area and 
asked them to find important notices and names 
of places and streets to document them to write 
a report 
 This activity is known as 
 (a) assignment  
(b) activity based learning 
 (c) peer work 
(d) project work 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2016  
Ans: (b) The activity of selecting a group of student 
and assign them to explore it and final important 
notices and names of places and streets to document 
them and make a report is called "the activity based 
learning" which is indicated in option (b). 
185. Activating learners' scheme means 
 
(a) making a link between the topic and learners' 
background knowledge and experience 
 
(b) making a link between the textbook and its 
structural patterns and grammatical items 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 21 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
692 
YCT 
 
(c) dealing 
with 
learners 
having 
learning 
difficulties 
 
(d) showing a picture and asking learners to write 
a story 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2016  
Ans: (a) Activating learners scheme means making a 
link between the topic and learners background 
knowledge and experience. Hence out of four options 
only option (a) is the right choice. Other options give 
wrong interpretation of the question. 
186. Global listening is not listening 
 
(a) without being constrained by preset questions 
or tasks 
 (b) for specific information 
 (c) at different levels of comprehension 
 (d) for improving recognition of spoken text 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2016  
Ans : (b) Global listening is not listening 'for specific 
information'. Global listening is that which a student 
needs to understand the central point of a lecture or 
long text. Hence option (b) is correct.  
187. When children are introduced to English as a 
second language 
 (a) they should begin with letters of alphabet 
 (b) they should read first 
 (c) they should be exposed to language orally 
 (d) they should begin writing first 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2016  
Ans : (a) There are four skills to learn foreign 
language. Listening, Writing, Reading and Speaking. 
Listening occupies first place among the four skill. 
But this skill is not mentioned in the option. Hence 
Option (a) is correct. 
188. A teacher of Class VII while teaching the poem, 
 
The Solitary Reaper by William Wordsworth 
asks children to find how the last words of each 
line sound. What is she trying to draw the 
attention of learners to? 
 (a) Spelling of words 
(b) Theme of the poem 
 (c) Rhyme scheme 
(d) Vocabulary 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2016  
Ans : (c) By the last word of each line of poetry, 
teacher is trying to draw the attention of learner to 
Rhyme scheme. In English versification, standard 
rhyme consist of the repetition, in the rhyming word, 
of the last stressed vowel and of all the speech sounds. 
Hence option (c) is correct.  
189. To help the students overcome the problems of 
spelling mistakes, the teacher will use.... as the 
teaching strategy. 
 (a) brainstorming 
(b) loud reading 
 (c) pronunciation drill 
(d) dictation 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2016  
Ans : (d) 'Dictation' is a teaching method. It is a test 
in which students write down what is being read to 
them or the act of speaking or reading so that 
somebody can write down the words. By this method 
teacher help the students the problem of spelling 
mistake. Hence option (d) is correct. 
190. Intensive reading stands for….. 
 (a) reading for enrichment of vocabulary 
 (b) reading for pleasure 
 (c) reading for developing literary sensitivity 
 (d) reading the text in parts for details 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (d) Intensive reading stands for reading the text 
in parts for details. Hence option (d) would be correct. 
191. For process writing, which one of the following 
points should be followed? 
 (a) Use of personal pronouns 
 (b) Organization of points 
 (c) Word limit 
 (d) Logical sequence 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (d) Logical sequence should be used for process 
writing. Hence option (d) would be correct. 
192. Scanning is a reading activity which helps the 
learners to……from/of the text. 
 (a) draw our information 
 (b) enrich the vocabulary 
 (c) develop competence in the linguistic items 
 (d) know the meanings of the words 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (a) Scanning is a reading activity which helps 
the learners to draw our information from the text. 
Hence option (a) would be correct. 
193. What are the other skills of language apart from 
listening, speaking, reading and writing? 
 (a) Grammar and Principles 
 (b) Thinking and Reasoning 
 (c) Creativity and Imagination 
 (d) Learning and Memorization 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2015 
Ans : (b) Thinking and Reasoning are the other skills 
of language learning apart from listening, speaking, 
reading and writing. Hence option (b). 
194. A reading activity where students focus on 
phonemic sounds, pronunciation and intonation 
can be used to assess 
 (a) analysis 
(b) literary appreciation 
 (c) reading accuracy 
(d) inference 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
Ans : (c) Reading accuracy can be assessed through 
focus on phonemic sounds, pronunciation and 
intonation in a activity. Hence option (c) is correct. 
195. To develop language functions, teaching of 
speaking skills for younger children would 
include 
 (a) debates and declamations 
 (b) short project presentations 
 
(c) greeting, informal requests, asking for personal 
information 
 (d) telephonic chat 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 22 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
693 
YCT 
Ans : (c) For younger children language functions can 
be developed by greetings informal requests and 
asking for personal information. Hence option (c) is 
correct. 
196. Task A role-play of approximately 2 minutes 
with the teacher in which the candidate exchanges 
information making four or five statements and 
asking three or four questions, including 
greeting and leave-taking would assess ……. 
skills. 
 (a) acting 
(b) speaking 
 (c) listening 
(d) vocabulary 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
Ans : (b) The above task would assess the speaking 
skills of the student. Hence option (b) is correct. 
197. A communication technique that requires the 
listener to feed back what they have heard in 
their own words, to confirm the understanding 
of both parties, is ……… listening. 
 (a) active 
(b) appreciative 
 (c) informative 
(d) passive 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July 2013 
Ans : (a) A communication technique requiring feed 
back after a listening exercise is active listening. 
198. Abilities for adaptive and positive behaviour 
that enable students to deal effectively with 
everyday demands and challenges are 
 (a) multiple intelligences 
 (b) learning domains 
 (c) life skills 
 (d) learning methods 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July 2013 
Ans : (c) ‘Life skills’ are the abilities for adaptive and 
positive behaviour enabling students to deal everyday 
situations. Hence option (c) would be correct. 
199. The gathering skill while reading is 
 (a) note-taking 
(b) note-making 
 (c) puzzling out 
(d) analysis 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July 2013 
Ans : (b) Note-making is the skill to remember 
important points while reading. Hence option (b) 
would be correct. 
200. When a teacher asks her students to write a 
letter after having a group discussion, she is 
 (a) likely to confuse the students 
 
(b) adopting the Direct Method of language 
teaching 
 (c) integrating different language skills 
 (d) following a traditional method 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Jan 2012 
Ans : (c) Writing a letter after a  group discussion 
exercise indicates integration of different language 
skills. Hence option (c) is correct. 
201. All-round development of a child implies 
 
(a) following 
the 
natural 
stages 
of 
child 
development 
 
(b) providing vocational education for the learner 
to function in any work environment 
 
(c) harmonious 
development 
of 
physical, 
emotional and mental faculties 
 
(d) specialized training to make the learner a ‘Jack 
of all Trades’ 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Jan 2012 
Ans : (c) All-round development of a child implies 
harmonious development of physical emotional and 
mental faculties. Hence option (c) is correct. 
202. While writing a telegram, a necessary feature to 
be applied is 
 (a) brevity 
(b) neatness 
 (c) personal touch 
(d) personal abbreviation 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
Ans : (a) In a telegram a necessary feature is ‘brevity’ 
or exactness. Hence option (a) would be correct. 
203. While reading, ‘signification’ is 
 
(a) comprehending a sentence by putting together 
the meaning of its constituent words 
 
(b) conversion 
of 
message 
farm 
into 
a 
diagram/table 
 
(c) arriving at the meaning of an unfamiliar word 
by reading other words in the sentence 
 (d) recognizing the message in a set of symbols 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
Ans : (c) In reading ‘signification’ is arriving at the 
meaning of an unfamiliar word by reading other 
words in the sentence. Hence option (c) would be 
correct. 
204. Read the following examples of dangling 
modifiers used in sentences by some students. 
Indicate how will assess them? 
 
[Max. 1 mark] 
 
Student 1 Having arrived late for practice, a 
written excuse was needed. 
 
Student 2 Without knowing his name, it was 
difficult to introduce him. 
 
Student 3 The experiment was a failure not 
having studied the lab manual carefully. 
 (a) Student 1 -0- 
  
Student 2 -1- 
  
Student 3 -0- 
 (b) Student 1 -0- 
  
Student 2 -1- 
  
Student 3 -1- 
 (c) Student 1 -1- 
  
Student 2 -1- 
  
Student 3 -0- 
 (d) Student 1 -1- 
  
Student 2 -0- 
  
Student 3 -0- 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 23 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
694 
YCT 
Ans : (a) Student 1 and 3 have failed the objectives of 
assessment and hence will be awarded 0 marks. Hence 
option (a) would be correct. 
205. Criteria of assessment is a/an 
 (a) general impression of a student’s ability 
 (b) assessment guideline 
 (c) scoring key 
 (d) question-wise distribution of marks 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
Ans : (a) Criteria of assessment is a general 
impression of a student’s ability. Hence option (a) 
would be correct. 
206. Which of the following will be most effective to 
remove conventional beliefs about gender roles? 
 
(a) Teaching all the learners to sweep, wash and 
saw in the craft class without any gender 
discrimination 
 
(b) Encouraging girls to develop interest in 
household chores from a young age 
 
(c) Telling the girls that talking freely is not a trait 
of good girls 
 
(d) Showing a picture in which the mother is seen 
cooking and the father is seen reading a 
newspaper 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
Ans : (a) To remove the conventional beliefs about 
gender roles in the class the skills must be taught 
without any gender discrimination. Hence option (a). 
207. 'Prediction' as a subskill is associated with 
 (a) reading 
 (b) drafting 
 (c) summarising 
 (d) note-making 
UPTET (VI-VIII) DEC. 2016 
Ans : (a) 'Prediction' is a subskill associated with 
reading. (A strategy for reading and science learning). 
Hence option (a) would be correct. 
208. What is the skill among the ones given below 
that cannot be tested in a formal written 
examination? 
 (a) Meaning of words and phrases 
 (b) Extensive reading for pleasure 
 (c) Analyzing text 
 (d) Reading for information 
UPTET (VI-VIII) Feb. 2016 
Ans : (b) efueefKele hejer#ee kesâ Éeje efkeâmeer Úe$e keâe MeyoeW leLee 
Phrasal verb kesâ %eeve, efJeMues<eCeelcekeâ %eeve leLee heÌ{ keâj 
mecePeves keâe %eeve keâe cetuÙeebkeâve efkeâÙee pee mekeâlee nw hejvleg efueefKele 
hejer#ee kesâ Éeje efJemle=le heÌ{eF& kesâ Deevevo keâes veneR veehee pee mekeâlee 
nw~ Dele: efJekeâuhe (b) Extensive reading for pleasure ner 
Skeâcee$e GheÙegòeâ Gòej nw~ DevÙe efJekeâuhe ieuele nQ~ 
F. 
EVALUATING 
LANGUAGE 
COMPREHENSION AND 
PROFICIENCY : 
SPEAKING LISTENING, 
READING AND WRITING 
 
209.  Which one of the following is not advocated as 
an element for assessment in a poem?  
 
(a) Grammar 
(b) Vocabulary  
 
(c) Poetic devices 
(d) Theme of the poem 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (a) : Grammar is not advocated as an element for 
assessment in a poem. Other three are considered as 
elements for assessment in a poem.   
210.  A teacher asked her learners to watch a movie 
two days ago and now she asks them to have a 
discussion on what would they do, if they were 
the hero/heroine of the movie? What is this 
assessment task known as?  
 
(a) Speaking task 
(b) Thinking task  
 
(c) Extrapolative task 
(d) Critical pedagogy 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (c) : 'Extrapolative task'. When you make an 
extrapolation, you take facts and observations about a 
present or known situation and use them to make a 
prediction about what might eventually happen.   
211.  A teacher of class VII asks her learners to 
bring at least two or three objects from home 
and she asks them to exchange the objects 
among themselves. She now asks them to 
describe the objects in their hands in at least 
ten sentences. What are the objects known as in 
language teaching-learning materials?  
 
(a) Teachers materials  
 
(b) Inputs for language learning  
 
(c) Realia 
 
(d) Home objects 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (c) : Realia refers to authentic objects from real 
life that one uses in the classroom to teach a specific 
concept.   
212.  An assessment done at the end of six months of 
one term is______.  
 
(a) Semester assessment  
 
(b) Remedial assessment  
 
(c) Summative assessment 
 
(d) Formative assessment 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (c) : Summative assessment or summative 
evaluation is the assessment of participants where the 
focus is on the outcome of a program. It usually 
involves students receiving a grade that indicates their 
level of performance.  
For Example- test after 6 months in schools, semester 
exams in B.Ed after each 6 months. 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 24 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
695 
YCT 
213. Which of the following is related to the mental 
development of the learner? 
 (a) Exposition 
(b) Imitation 
 (c) Characterization 
(d) Comprehension 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (d) 'Comprehension' is related to the mental 
development of the learner. 
Reading comprehension is the ability to process text, 
understand its meaning and to integrate with what the 
reader already knows. 
(mecePe meerKeves Jeeues kesâ ceeveefmekeâ efJekeâeme mes mecyeefvOele nw)~ 
214. Unit test is an expression of .......... evaluation. 
 (a) normative 
(b) effective 
 (c) formative 
(d) conative 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (c) Unit test is an expression of formative 
evaluation. DeLee&led DeOÙeeÙe hejer#ee Skeâ jÛeveelcekeâ cetuÙeebkeâve keâer 
DeefYeJÙeefòeâ nw~ Gòeâ DeeMeÙe keâes efJekeâuhe (c) ceW JÙeòeâ efkeâÙee ieÙee 
nw~ Dele: Option (c) Proper answer nw~ 
Formative evaluations are evaluations for learning. 
They aim to provide the students understanding. Mes<e 
efJekeâuhe Proper answer veneR nQ~ 
215. Evaluation is a process of 
 (a) Ascertaining the quality, value of outcomes 
 
(b) Determining the extent of the achievement of 
objectives 
 (c) Comparing the outcomes of instructions 
 (d) All of these 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (d) Evaluation (cetuÙeebkeâve) is the process of 
ascertaining the quality, value of outcomes and 
determining the extent of the achievement of objectives 
and comparing the outcomes of instructions. DeLee&led 
cetuÙeebkeâve ÙeesiÙelee efveOee&jCe heefjCeeceeW keâe cetuÙe, meercee efveOee&jCe SJeb 
GheueefyOeÙeeW, heefjCeeceeW Je efveoxMeeW keâer leguevee Deeefo keâer ØeCeeueer nw~ 
Gòeâ DeeMeÙe keâer hegef° efJekeâuhe (d) JÙeòeâ keâjlee nw~ 
216. An important feature of an adequate evaluation 
is 
 (a) it is irresponsible 
(b) it is diagnostic 
 (c) it enhances learning (d) it harasses students 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (c) Skeâ adequate evaluation (heÙee&hle cetuÙeebkeâve) keâer 
efJeMes<elee (feature) nw efkeâ Ùen Students keâer learning keâes 
enhance keâjlee nw (megOeejlee nw)~ 
217.  At the pre-primary stage reading aloud while 
writing is given importance. This is based on 
which theory of learning?  
 
(a) Trial and Error 
(b) Imitation 
 
(c) Insight 
(d) Conditioning 
UK TET (VI-VIII) 2020 
Ans. (d) : At the Pre-primary stage reading aloud while 
writing is given importance. 
This is based on conditionging theory of learning. 
Conditioning – (Devegketâueve Ùee DevegyevOeve) 
A learning process in which an organism's behavior 
becomes dependent on the occurrence of a stimulus in 
its environment. 
218.  Intensive reading refers to :  
 
(a) reading a text for pleasure 
 
(b) reading a text for editing 
 
(c) reading a text for someone else 
 
(d) reading a text for detailed information 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (d) : Intensive reading involves learners reading in 
detail with specific learning aims and tasks. The readers 
read in the text, focusing on the new vocabulary, 
grammatical forms, the purpose of the author and the 
problems of the text. 
219.  What does CLIL stand for ?  
 
(a) Content and Language based Interesting 
Learning 
 
(b) Content and Language Integrated Learning 
 
(c) Context for Language Integrated Learning 
 
(d) Content Language Inter Learning 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (b) : CLIL stands for Content and Language 
Integrated Learning. It basically refers to teaching 
subject such as science, history and geography to 
student through a foreign language.  
220.  Top-down process of reading :  
 
(a) proceeds from part to whole 
 
(b) proceeds from centre to periphery 
 
(c) proceeds from bottom to top 
 
(d) proceeds from whole to part  
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
Ans. (d) : Top down process of reading proceeds from 
whole to part. In it a teacher guides the instruction the 
activity, the conversation and the specific output. In this 
process the student receives knowledge from an 
instructor, 
then 
tests 
that 
knowledge 
through 
application, building greater understanding and clarify 
confusion along the way. 
221.  A teacher asks her learners to collect 
words/phrases on various aspects they see and 
notice in their markets and streets. Later, the 
learners write the words and phrases according 
to the category and discuss them in the class. 
What is this practice known as ?  
 
(a) Genre based words 
 
(b) Active vocabulary 
 
(c) Thematic vocabulary learning 
 
(d) Topic words learning 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (c) : If a teacher asks learners to collect 
words/phrases from their locality or surrounding and 
later tells them to categories these words and its 
importance, this practice known as thematic vocabulary 
learning.    
222.  Teaching a novel is to promote : 
 
(a) reading for details 
 
(b) reading to become a writer 
 
(c) reading to learn vocabulary 
 
(d) reading for pleasure 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 25 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
696 
YCT 
Ans. (d) : Teaching a novel is to promote reading for 
pleasure and also gives a platform for students to show 
case their work while helping in learning to build 
confidence.  
223.  Which of the following statement is correct ?  
 
(a) Receptive vocabulary are words we recognize 
when we hear or see and productive 
vocabulary are words we speak or write 
 
(b) Receptive vocabulary are words we discourse 
with people and productive vocabulary are 
words in written text  
 
(c) Words from other language are receptive 
vocabulary and words from native language 
are productive vocabulary 
 
(d) Receptive vocabulary are words we speak and 
productive vocabulary are words we hear 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (a) : Receptive vocabulary are words we recognize 
when we hear or see and productive vocabulary are 
words we speak or write. 
224.  Extensive reading is : 
 
(a) reading for facts 
 
(b) reading to write 
 
(c) reading 
for 
pleasure 
and 
overall 
understanding of the text 
 
(d) reading in detail every word and idea for deep 
understanding 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans. (c) :  
(1) Extensive reading is reading for pleasure and 
overall understanding of the text. 
(2) It focuses on main points and means non detailed 
study of the text book. 
(3) Extensive reading is to train the learners to read 
directly and fluently in the target language 
(4) It is assocaited with day-to-day life like reading a 
newspaper an article or other things.   
225. Match the types of writing with their 
corresponding category : 
A. 
Personal writing 
i. 
Letter of complaint 
B. 
Study writing 
ii. 
Dairy writing 
C. 
Creative writing 
iii. 
Synopsis writing 
D. 
Public writing 
iv. 
Travelogue 
 
 A 
B 
C 
D 
 
(a) ii 
iii 
iv 
i 
 
(b) iii 
ii 
i 
iv 
 
(c) iv 
iii 
ii 
i 
 
(d) i 
ii 
iii 
iv 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II July, 2019 
Ans : (a) Option (a) is correct. 
A. 
Personal writing 
ii. 
Dairy writing 
B. 
Study writing 
iii. 
Synopsis writing  
C. 
Creative writing 
iv. 
Travelogue  
D. 
Public writing 
i. 
Letter of complaint 
226. 'Pre-reading' activity in class is to : 
 
(a) connect learners' with one another 
 
(b) enable learners to know about the story with 
they would read ahead 
 
(c) All of these 
 
(d) connect learner's previous knowledge with 
what she learns in the reading text 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II July, 2019 
Ans : (d) Pre-reading activity in class is to connect 
learner's previous knowledge with what she learns in 
the reading text. 
227. A teacher of Class–VII asked her students to 
read a short story and come to the class. She 
asks them to discuss the major points of the 
story in groups and present them to the whole 
class. What is this reading known as? 
 
(a) Reading with a purpose 
 
(b) Reading for thinking 
 
(c) Extensive reading 
 
(d) Intensive reading 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II July, 2019 
Ans : (c) Extensive reading– Extensive reading means 
non-detailed study of the text book. It focuses on main 
points. It is also to train the learner to read directly and 
fluently in the target language. It objectives is to 
increase passive vacobulary to develop interest and 
pleasure, to increase mental horizon by gaining wide 
knowledge. 
228.  If you are listening to the description of how to 
reach a specific location, then you are doing– 
 
(a) casual listening 
(b) focused listening  
 
(c) intensive listening 
(d) extensive listening 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2018  
Ans. (c) : If you are listening to the description of how 
to reach a specific location, then you are doing intensive 
listening. 
Intensive Listening activites focus the student's 
attention or language form. The aim of Intensive 
Learning is to raise the learners' awareness of how 
differences in sound structure and lexical choice can 
affect meaning.  
229.  If a student of language is cramming his/her 
answers, then he/she would not be able to– 
 
(a) attempt question answers 
 
(b) attempt vocabulary–based exercise  
 
(c) attempt structural questions 
 
(d) attempt creative writing 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2018  
Ans. (d) : If a student of language is cramming his/her 
answers, then he/she would not be able to attempt 
creative writing.  
230.  Language  of word is not necessary for– 
 
(a) imaginative thinking 
 
(b) conceptual thinking  
 
(c) associative thinking 
 
(d) perceptual thinking 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2018  
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 26 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
697 
YCT 
Ans. (a) : Language of word is not necessary for 
imaginative thinking. 
231.  Writing is the _________ representation of 
speech sounds. 
 
(a) alphabetical 
(b) graphical  
 
(c) phonetic 
(d) systematic 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2018  
Ans. (b) : Writing is the graphical representation of 
speech sounds. 
232. Prediction in terms of reading refers to 
 
(a) using knowledge of subject matter for guessing 
the content and vocabulary 
 (b) paraphrasing 
 (c) previewing  
 
(d) using prior knowledge of the subject and the 
ideas in the text as clues to the meanings of 
unknown words 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2016  
Ans: (d) Prediction in terms of reading means using 
prior knowledge of the subject and the ideas in text as 
clues to the meanings of unknown words. Hence 
option (d) is the accurate answer and other options 
give wrong meaning of it. 
233. A speech community refers to a group of people 
who 
 (a) are bilingual 
 
(b) share community membership and linguistic 
communication 
 
(c) share homogeneity with reference to their 
value system 
 (d) are multilingual 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2016  
Ans: (c) A speech community refers to a group of 
people who share homogeneity with reference to their 
value system. Hence out of four options only option (c) 
is correct. Other options gives wrong inference of it. 
234. Written description of a child's progress that a 
teacher keeps on a day-to-day basis is 
 (a) anecdotal record 
(b) rubric 
 (c) portfolio 
(d) rating scale 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2016  
Ans : (a) 'Anecdotal record' refers to a personal account 
of an event. So option (a) is correct answer for written 
description of a child's progress that a teacher keeps 
on a day-to-day. Hence option (a) is correct.   
235. A teacher of Class VI in a writing assessment 
task asked students to write on "If I were 
famous for something....." This is assessment of 
a/an ...... answer. 
 (a) extrapolative 
(b) narrative 
 (c) factual 
(d) descriptive 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2016  
Ans : (d) In present question writing assessment task 
is based on personal or particular predictive event. 
This assessment clearly refer descriptive technique 
because in descriptive technique a spoken or written 
account of a person, object or event is mentioned. 
Hence option (d) is correct.  
236. Continuous and Comprehensive Evaluation of 
learner is 
 (a) periodic assessment of learning 
 (b) periodic assessment of teaching 
 (c) continuous tests and assignments 
 (d) conducting continuous tests 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2016  
Ans: (a) Continuous and Comprehensive evaluation 
of learner is applied for estimating the learning of the 
student. This is clearly indicated in option (a) periodic 
assessment of learning. The other options give wrong 
answer. 
237. A good listener can 
 (a) correctly respond to every question asked 
 (b) recognize how intonation is used 
 (c) pronounce each and every word correctly 
 (d) understand how to spell a word 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (a) A good listener can correctly respond to 
every question asked. Hence option (a) would be 
correct. 
238. An early emphasis on linguistic accuracy along 
with prompt error correction in L2 class at 
Class V level results in students 
 (a) learning only the minimum or less 
 (b) not learning at all 
 (c) mastering the language more quickly 
 
(d) failure to achieve requisite proficiency required 
of that level 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
Ans : (a) An early emphasis on linguistic accuracy at 
Class V level results in students learning very less or 
minimum. Hence option (a) is correct. 
239. To assess listening skills, the teacher has framed 
an activity. What can the assessment be based 
on? 
 
(a) Completing a tabulation based on an audio 
recording 
 (b) Reading a text aloud 
 (c) Students’ interpretation of a visual 
 (d) Watching a short film and reviewing 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
Ans : (a) The teacher can assess the student’s 
listening skills by completing a tabulation based on an 
audio recording. Hence option (a) is correct. 
240. Smaller class size for slow learners facilitates 
greater personalized instruction in the new 
language because of 
 
(a) incidental learning, informal assessment and 
more interaction 
 
(b) disciplined approach, less interaction and 
formal assessment 
 
(c) more 
interaction, 
flexible 
schedule 
and 
authentic assessment 
 
(d) language focused, formal assessment and 
flexible schedule 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 27 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
698 
YCT 
Ans : (c) Smaller class size for slow learners 
facilitates greater personalized instruction in the new 
language because of more interaction, flexible 
schedule and authentic assessment. Hence option (c) 
is correct. 
241. A short text is read aloud and then students 
visualize what the passage describes. Then they 
tell the teacher about their visualization, or 
draw a picture. The activity assesses students’ 
 (a) speaking with clarity 
 (b) listening comprehension 
 (c) ability to draw well 
 (d) accuracy in interpretation 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
Ans : (b) The activity described above assesses 
students’ listening comprehension. Hence option (b) is 
correct. 
242. Standardized 
assessment 
means 
…… 
assessment. 
 (a) formative 
(b) summative 
 (c) frequent 
(d) alternative 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July 2013 
Ans : (b) Standardized assessment means summative 
assessment (summative means sum total). Hence 
option (b) would be correct. 
243. Curriculum is an educational programme which 
does not state 
 
(a) the means of evaluating whether these 
educational ends have been achieved or not 
 (b) the lesson planning details of the topics 
 (c) the educational purpose of a programme 
 
(d) the content (material, etc.), teaching strategies 
and learning experiences which will be 
necessary to achieve this purpose 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Jan 2012 
Ans : (a) Curriculum does not state the means of 
evaluating whether the educational objectives have 
been achieved or not. Hence option (a) is correct. 
244. Comprehensive Evaluation refers to assessment 
of 
 (a) summative assessment tests 
 (b) co-curricular activities 
 (c) academic subjects 
 (d) both scholastic and co-scholastic areas 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Jan 2012 
Ans : (a) Comprehensive evaluation refers to 
summative assessment test. Hence option (a) is correct. 
245. A good test on reading comprehension will have 
questions 
 
(a) that 
test 
inference, 
interpretation 
and 
evaluation besides comprehension 
 
(b) that focus primarily on the structures and 
words used in the text 
 (c) that text the textual knowledge thoroughly 
 
(d) that encourage learners to write answers 
without errors 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Jan 2012 
Ans : (a) A good test on reading comprehension has 
questions that test inference, interpretation and 
evaluation besides comprehension. Hence option (a) is 
correct. 
246. Picture comprehension is effective to promote 
 
(a) literary skill 
(b) artistic skill 
 
(c) speaking skill 
(d) listening skill 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Jan 2012 
Ans : (a) Picture comprehension is effective to 
promote literary skill. Hence option (a) is correct. 
247. In a listening-speaking assessment activity, indi. 
cate how you will assess the following exchange 
 
Teacher Have you matched any English film 
lately? Tell your friend about it. 
 Student 1 Of course, Especially animations. 
 Student 2 Me too. I like them a lot. 
 (a) Student 1 Incorrect response 
  
Student 2 Incorrect response 
 (b) Student 1 Correct response 
  
Student 2 Correct response 
 (c) Student 1 Incorrect response 
  
Student 2 Correct response 
 (d) Student 1 Correct response 
  
Student 2 Incorrect response 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
Ans : (a) Both the students need to be more formal 
and comprehensive in their response. Hence option (a) 
would be correct. 
248. While reading for comprehension, we understand  
that the following pairs are examples of 
homographs 
 (a) mail [post] / male [gender] 
 (b) warm/tepid [being neither too hot nor too cold] 
 (c) lead [metal] / lead [give direction] 
 (d) led [gave direction] / lead [metal] 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
Ans : (c) Homographs are similarly spelt words with 
different meanings as in option (c). Hence option (c) 
would be correct. 
249. Choose the appropriate intonation. 
 
He has passed with distinction in English, 
however… 
 (a) rising-falling 
(b) falling-rising 
 (c) rising 
(d) falling 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
Ans : (b) Intonation indicates variation in the attitudes 
or emotions of the speaker which, in this case is 
falling-rising. Hence option (b) would be correct. 
250. A test to assess the potential of students for 
specific abilities and skills such as music, spatial 
ability or logical ability is called a/an 
 (a) aptitude test 
(b) attitude test 
 (c) achievement test 
(d) proficiency test 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 28 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
699 
YCT 
Ans : (a) ‘Aptitude test’ assesses the specific abilities 
and skills of students such as music, spatial ability or 
logical ability. Hence option (a). 
251. The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education Act, 2009 has ‘overall development’ 
as an aim. It means 
 
(a) nurturing both the scholastic and co-scholastic 
areas 
 
(b) coaching all the children for academic 
excellence 
 (c) training the children for different careers 
 
(d) training the children for the development of the 
country 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
Ans : (a) The aim of overall development means 
nurturing both scholastic (academic) and co-scholastic 
(co-curricular) areas. Hence option (a). 
G. 
TEACHING- LEARNING 
MATERIALS : 
TEXTBOOK, 
MULTIMEDIA 
MATERIALS, 
MULTILINGUAL 
RESOURCE OF THE 
CLASSROOM 
252.  Have are some sets of words in some pattern. 
Find what are these known as in teaching-
learning of pronunciation? bit-bet, did-dead, 
hid-head, lid-lead, miss-mess, pin-pen, lock-
luck  
 
(a) Vowels 
(b) Stress and intonation  
 
(c) Contrastive pairs 
(d) Comparable pairs 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (c) : A contrastive pair of words is a pair of words 
that 
are 
the 
same, 
except 
for 
a 
contrasting 
letter/sequence 
of 
letters 
and 
a 
corresponding 
contrastive speech sound/sequence of letters and a 
corresponding contrastive speech sound/sequence of 
speech sounds. Hence, bit-bet, did-dead, hid-heal, lid-
lead, miss-mess, pin-pen, lock-luck are the examples of 
contrastive pairs.     
253.  A teacher wanted her students to learn 
vocabulary effectively. Which of the following 
ways should she adopt to teach vocabulary in 
her classroom?    
 
(a) Ask them to find the meanings of the words 
in the dictionary.  
 
(b) Ask them to group the words into meaningful 
categories and use them in real life purposes.   
 
(c) Write all the new words on the blackboard 
and write their meanings in the language of 
teaching. 
 
(d) Ask her learners to underline the difficult 
words in a lesson and find their meanings in 
their language.    
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (b) : To ask the students to group the words into 
meaningful categories and use them in real life purposes 
is very effective way to make learn the students 
vocabulary.   
254.  A teacher selected a text from a newspaper and 
dropped every fifth word and asked her 
learners to supply the missing words. What is a 
test known as? 
 
(a) Complete the comprehensible paragraph  
 
(b) Writing test  
 
(c) A cloze test 
 
(d) Fill in the blanks 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (c) : 'A cloze test'. A cloze test (also called the 
'cloze deletion test') is an exercise, test or assessment 
consisting of a portion of text with certain words 
removed (cloze text), where the teacher asks the 
participant to restore the missing words. Cloze test 
requires the ability to understand context and 
vocabulary in order to identify the correct language or 
part of speech that belongs in the deleted passage. 
255. Which of the following is an audio-visual 
teaching aid? 
 (a) Gramophone 
(b) Flannel-board 
 (c) Television 
(d) Radio 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (c) 'Television' is an audio-visual teaching aid. 
Television (TV), the electronic delivery of moving 
images and sound from a source to a receiver. 
(efMe#eCe meece«eer ceW otjoMe&ve efJeÅeeefLe&ÙeeW kesâ megveves Deewj osKeves ceW 
Skeâ meneÙekeâ meece«eer kesâ ™he ceW nw)~ 
256. In which of the following types of substitution 
the variables cannot be interchanged? 
 (a) Simple substitution  
 (b) Compound substitution 
 (c) Complex substitution 
 (d) Grammatical substitution 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (a) Simple substitution the variables cannot be 
interchanged.  
A simple substitution (mejue ØeeflemLeeheve) is one in which 
each letter of the plain text is always replaced by the 
same cipher text symbol. 
257. The text-books help the teachers in which of the 
following ways? 
 (A) It makes the teaching of English systematic 
 (b) It checks the teacher from going astray 
 (c) It facilitates self-learning and self-study 
 (d) All of these 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (d) The text-books help the teachers in several 
ways, such as – it makes the teaching English 
systematic and it checks the teacher from going astray 
and facilitates self learning and self study. DeLee&led hee"Ÿe 
hegmlekeWâ efMe#ekeâ keâes keâF& lejerkeâeW mes ceoo keâjleer nQ, Jes Deb«espeer 
efMe#eCe keâes JÙeJeefmLele keâjkesâ efMe#ekeâ keâes Yeškeâves mes jeskeâleer nw SJeb 
Gvekeâes mJeeOÙeeÙe Je meerKeves keâer Øeef›eâÙee keâes megefJeOeepevÙe yeveeleer nw~ 
Dele: efJekeâuhe (d) GefÛele Gòej nw~ 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 29 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
700 
YCT 
258. Which of the following plays the basic role in 
learning a mother tongue? 
 (a) Motivation 
(b) Naturalness 
 (c) Habit formation 
(d) Purpose 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (c) Habit formation plays the basic role in  
learning a mother tongue. 
Habit formation is the process by which a behaviour, 
through regular repetition, becomes automatic or 
habitual. 
DeLee&led habit formation (Deeole efvecee&Ce) Jen Øeef›eâÙee nw efpemekesâ 
Éeje regular repetition (oesnjeves keâer Øeef›eâÙee) kesâ keâejCe keâesF& 
language habit ceW Dee peeleer nw~ 
259.  What is the use of text book in a class?  
 
(a) to limit the course content 
 
(b) to achieve learning objectives 
 
(c) to explain ideas and concepts 
 
(d) to make learning interesting 
UK TET (VI-VIII) 2020 
Ans. (b) : The use of text book in a class is to achieve 
learning objectives.  
It is a fool to be used in the teaching learning process to 
facilitate effective and meaningful learning.  
260.  A teacher brings a newspaper to her class VIII 
students 
and 
asks 
them 
to 
find 
some 
advertisements. She then asks them to list out 
how advertisements are designed and what an 
advertisement contains. What is the newspaper 
here? 
 
(a) An instrument of language learning 
 
(b) A technique of language learning 
 
(c) Materials for language learning 
 
(d) For reading 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (c) : In language learning. If a teacher uses 
newspaper, paper cuttings, extra things like dummy of 
animals, maps etc. It all comes under the materials for 
language learning.  
261.  Multilingualism as a resource in education 
aims at : 
 
(a) making learners learn as many languages as 
possible 
 
(b) using classical languages for teaching-
learning. 
 
(c) enabling to learn English language for jobs 
and mother tongue for culture 
 
(d) making use of languages of learners for 
teaching-learning 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (d) : Multilingualism as resource in education 
aims at making use of languages of learners for teaching 
learning. If practices in education include the creation 
and appreciation of cultural awareness, adds academic 
and educational value, enhances creativity adjustment in 
society and appreciation of local languages.    
262.  Drilling is a teaching-learning technique or a 
strategy in ..........  
 
(a) Structuralism 
 
(b) Communicative learning teaching 
 
(c) Lexical approach 
 
(d) Constructivist language teaching 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2019 
Ans. (a) : Structuralism in linguistics asserts. The idea 
that all of the parts of teaching learning or strategy for 
English are interwoven and because they are all 
interrelated, they don't have the same meaning when in 
isolation.    
263.  Which one of the following makes the 
communication a cyclic process ?  
 
(a) Receiver 
(b) Feedback 
 
(c) Message 
(d) Sender 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
Ans. (b) : Feedback occurs when outputs of a system 
are routed back as inputs as part of a chain of cause and 
effect that forms the best learning process. It is basically 
a cyclic process for improving more and more correctly. 
264.  A teacher brought real life objects like a 
hammer, a screw driver and so on to her class. 
She asked her learners to describe the objects 
in five to seven sentences. What are the 
materials in language teaching known as? 
 
(a) Tools 
(b) Language input  
 
(c) Realia 
(d) Teaching implements 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans. (c) : Relia are real-life objects used in classroom 
that enable children to make connections to their own 
lives as they try to make sense of new concepts and 
ideas. This strategy brings the perceptives central text to 
life for students by using everyday objects during the 
read aloud.  
265. Process approach to writing involves : 
 
(a) Brainstorming, writing the first draft and 
final writing 
 
(b) Outlining, revising and writing the final draft 
 
(c) Writing the fist draft, revising and developing 
the final draft 
 
(d) Brainstorming, outlining, drafting revising, 
proof-reading and drafting the final writing. 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II July, 2019 
Ans : (d) Process approach to writing involves brain 
storming outlining. Drafting revising proof reading and 
drafting the final writing. 
266.  'A task' in Task Based Language Learning 
means ..........  
 
(a) a piece of work designed by the teacher for 
language teacher. 
 
(b) a text-book exercise to be carried out by 
learners individuals 
 
(c) a task for the teacher for assessing learners 
language learning 
 
(d) an activity where the target language is used 
by the learner for a communicative purpose. 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 30 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
701 
YCT 
Ans. (d) : 'A task' in Task Based Language learning 
means an activity where the target language is used by 
the learner for a communicative purpose. 
267.  A teacher asks her learners to discuss in groups 
of four, jot down ideas and then develop them 
in an outline to write a paragraph. Learners 
then edit the paragraph into a final draft. 
Which strategy of writing does the teacher 
follow here ?  
 
(a) Process approach 
(b) Product approach 
 
(c) Discussion method (d) Group work 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2019 
Ans. (a) : Process writing is an approach for teaching 
and writing. Where language learners focus on the 
process by which they produce their written products 
rather than on the products themselves. 
268.  A teacher along with her learners writes the 
names of objects in the classroom (like door, 
black board, windows etc) in their mother 
tongue and in English on pieces of paper and 
pastes them on the objects for learners to notice 
the words. What is the teacher trying to do? 
 
(a) The teacher is creating a (print) language rich 
environment in the classroom 
 
(b) The teacher is trying to teach letters of 
alphabet  
 
(c) The teacher is creating a situation for the 
students to learn the spelling of the words 
 
(d) The teacher wants her learners to write well 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July, 2019 
Ans. (a) : The teacher is creating a (print) language rich 
environment in the classroom.  
269.  Decorum is spoken English pertains to– 
 
(a) appropriate gestures 
 
(b) clarity and purity of style  
 
(c) correct grammatical usage 
 
(d) voice quality 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2018  
Ans. (a) : Decorum is spoken English pertains to 
appropriate gestures.  
270.  Two words have identical sound and spelling, 
but not related in meaning. It is known as–  
 
(a) homephone 
(b) homonymy  
 
(c) homograph 
(d) polysemy 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-II Dec 2018  
Ans. (b) : Homonymy–The Relation between two 
words that are spelled and pronounced in the same way 
but differ in meaning.  
271. A good language textbook should 
 A. contain learner-centred materials. 
 
B. contain teacher-friendly instruction and 
content-related materials. 
 C. incorporate language skills throughout. 
 D. have more syntactical items in its content. 
 Which of the above are true? 
 (a) A, B, and C 
(b) B, C and D 
 (c) A, B and D 
(d) A, C and D 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2016  
Ans : (c) Option (c) is related to language skill that is 
not a characteristic of a good language text book so 
except this potion all other option (a), (b) and (d) 
satisfies the answer. Hence option (c) is correct.  
272. Decoding stands for…… 
 
(a) deciphering the sounds in words and sentences 
 (b) passing on a message to others 
 
(c) only recognizing the difference between 
sounds 
 (d) failure to understand the given text 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (a) Decoding stands for deciphering the sounds 
in words and sentences. Hence option (a) would be 
correct. 
273. A non-fictional text is classified and organized 
through 
 (a) Central theme and Meanings 
 (b) Story and Plot 
 (c) Synonyms and Antonyms 
 (d) Simile and Rhetoric 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2015 
Ans : (a) A non-fictional text is classified and 
organized through central theme and meanings and a 
fictional text through story and plot. Hence option (a). 
274. A Phoneme is 
 (a) a dipthong 
 
 (b) a vowel sound 
 (c) a single unit of sound 
 (d) a single unit of a word 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2015 
Ans : (c) A Phoneme is a single unit of sound. Hence 
option (c). 
275. A teacher found an advertisement pamphlet for 
sale of biscuits. She uses it for reading and 
speaking activities in her class. What do you call 
the pamphlet? 
 (a) Extra materials 
(b) Newspaper clipping 
 (c) Realia 
(d) An authentic text 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2015 
Ans : (d) The pamphlet would be called an authentic 
text. Hence option (d). 
276. …….facilitate communication between schools 
as well as between students/teachers and 
programmes or between students/teachers and 
data. 
 (a) Voice recorders 
(b) Computers 
 (c) Reference books 
(d) Whiteboards 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
Ans : (b) Computers facilitate communication of all 
kinds of data. Hence option (b) is correct. 
277. A factual description of a laboratory equipment, 
for a school science journal, requires the student 
to present the following 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 31 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
702 
YCT 
 (a) function, appearance, location 
 (b) comparisons, function, users 
 (c) appearance, users, location 
 (d) function, appearance, use 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
Ans : (d) A student can present the factual description 
of a laboratory equipment through its function, 
appearance and use. Hence option (d) is correct. 
278. The ‘sandwich-technique’ is a bilingual method 
which has a three-phase structure of 
 (a) listening-writing-repetition 
 (b) drills with levels of difficulty 
 (c) presentation-practice-production 
 (d) error correction-re-production (as drill) 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
Ans : (c) The sandwich-technique has a three phrase 
structure of presentation-practice-producton. Hence 
option (c) is correct. 
279. New technology is becoming an integral part of 
our social fabric. This is reflected in the 
classroom when students are 
 
(a) actively searching for answers using computers 
 (b) using a whiteboard during a presentation 
 
(c) on frequent field trips for first hand experience 
 (d) narrating during Power Point presentation 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
Ans : (a) New technology is becoming an integral 
part of our social fabric which is reflected in students 
actively searching for answers using computers. 
Hence option (a) is correct. 
280. Communication technology that enable sharing 
of educational resources within an institution 
 (a) internet 
(b) intranet 
 (c) telephone 
(d) audio-video cassette 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July 2013 
Ans : (b) Intranet enables sharing of resources within 
an institution. Hence option (b) would be correct. 
281. Multiple choice items consist of a 
 (a) set of questions 
 (b) options to choose questions 
 (c) sequence of grammatical errors 
 (d) stem and a set of options 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July 2013 
Ans : (d) Multiple choice items consist of stem 
(problem) and a set of options (possible answers). 
Hence option (d) would be correct. 
282. E-learning refers to 
 (a) acquisition of the mother tongue 
 (b) learning English language as the first language 
 
(c) use of electronic media and information and 
communication technologies 
 (d) a language course for foreign languages 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July 2013 
Ans : (c) E-learning means electronic learning i.e. use 
of 
electronic 
media 
and 
information 
and 
communication 
technologies 
(ICI) 
to 
provide 
instructions to learners. Hence option (c) would be 
correct. 
283. The most important feature of an effective 
language classroom is opportunity for learners 
to 
 (a) imitate 
(b) relax 
 (c) interact 
(d) evaluate 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Jan 2012 
Ans : (a) An Important feature of effective language 
classroom is opportunity for learners to imitate or 
repeat difficult words as pronounced by the teacher. 
Hence option (a) is correct. 
284. The ‘value’ of a word in a text means the  
 (a) dictionary meaning of a word 
 (b) significance of the word in a particular context 
 
(c) appropriate use of the word in a particular 
context 
 (d) number of ways a word can be used 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Nov 2012 
Ans : (b) The value of a word in a text means the 
significance of the word in a particular context. Hence 
option (b) would be correct. 
285. “Schools need to become centres that prepare 
children for life and ensure that all children, 
especially the differently abled, children from 
marginalized sections and children in difficult 
circumstances get the maximum benefit of this 
critical area of education.” – This observation 
found in the National Curriculum Framework 
2005 is related to 
 (a) constructivist learning 
 (b) gender equality 
 (c) critical pedagogy 
 (d) inclusive education 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
Ans : (d) In inclusive education all children with and 
without disabilities participate and learn together in 
the same classes as mentioned in the above 
description. Hence option (d). 
286. A play can be taught by 
 
(a) encouraging the students to stage the play after 
working in grounds to understand the plot, 
characters etc. 
 
(b) asking a number of questions to test the 
comprehension of the students 
 
(c) conducting a test with specific questions on the 
story and grammar items 
 
(d) making the students read the silently a number 
of times to understand the story 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
Ans : (a) A play can be best taught by encouraging 
the students to stage the play after working in groups 
to understand the plot, character story, style etc about 
the play. Hence option (a). 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 32 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
703 
YCT 
H. 
REAMEDIAL TEACHING 
287.  What are three components of PPP model of 
teaching?  
 
(a) Pre-teaching-Practice teaching–Produce result  
 
(b) Per-conception-Practice by teacher – Post 
conception   
 
(c) Present – Practice – Produce 
 
(d) Product – Practice – Present 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (c) : 'Present-Practice-Produce'. The three 
components 
of 
'PPP' 
model 
of 
teaching 
are- 
'Presentation, practice and production'. The teacher 
presents the target language and then gives students the 
opportunity to practice it through very controlled 
activities.    
288. A teacher found some of the aspects of 
language 
learning 
e.g. 
reading 
with 
understanding  a text on scientific concepts. 
She decided to pick students who find it 
difficult on the particular aspects. She took 
separate session for them to support them read 
and understand such text. What is she trying to 
do here?     
 
(a) Thinking Skills 
(b) Feedback Teaching  
 
(c) Remedial Teaching (d) Higher Order Skills 
C TET (VI-VIII) 31 January 2021 
Ans. (c) : In 'Remedial Teaching' Students who have 
temporarily fallen behind in their studies or otherwise 
need short-term support in their learning have the right 
to get remedial teaching.  
Remedial teaching can counteract difficulties forehand. 
289. The basic remedial English may cover 
 (a) vocabulary 
 (b) reading comprehension 
 (c) both (a) and (b) 
 (d) none of these 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (c) The basic remedial English may cover the 
vocabulary 
and 
reading 
comprehension. 
Basic 
remedial English (GheÛeejelcekeâ) ceW learners keâer MeyoeJeueer 
keâes megOeejves kesâ meeLe-meeLe Yee<ee mecyevOeer mecePe kesâ efJekeâeme hej Yeer 
yeue efoÙee peelee nw~ 
Hence option (c) is correct. 
290. Remedial classes play an important role for 
 (a) society 
(b) bright students 
 (c) disabled ones 
(d) intelligent ones 
REET (VI-VIII) 2021 
Ans. (c) Remedial classes Ssmes learners kesâ efueS cenlJehetCe& 
Yetefcekeâe efveYeeleer nw pees learning disabilities (meerKeves mecyevOeer 
De#ecelee) mes «eefmele nw~ Remedial Classes (R.E.) learners 
kesâ meeceves DeeÙeer ngF& yeeOeeDeeW keâes otj keâjkesâ Gvekeâer Skills keâes 
yeÌ{eJee osves keâe keâeÙe& keâjleer nw~ 
Hence, option (c) is correct. 
291. A disorder related to language comprehension 
is: 
 (A) Aphasia 
(b) Apraxia 
 (c) Dysiexia 
(d) Aspeechxia 
UK TET (VI-VIII) 2020 
Ans. 
(c) 
A 
disorder 
related 
to 
language 
comprehension DeLee&led Yee<ee efJekeâej Ùee he"ve efJekeâej mecyeefvOele 
mecemÙee keâes Dysiexia keânles nQ, FmeerefueS efJekeâuhe (c) GheÙegòeâ 
Gòej nw~ 
292.  Which one of the following can be used as a 
rubric for the assessment of fluency and 
coherence of language? 
 
(a) Can express with some flexibility and 
appropriacy on variety of topics 
 
(b) Can initiate and logically develop simple 
conversation on a familiar topic  
 
(c) Is always comprehensible, uses appropriate 
intonation 
 
(d) Demonstrates hesitation of find words or use 
correct grammatical structures 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Dec 2018  
Ans. (d) : Demonstrates hesitation of find words or use 
correct grammatical structures can be used as a rubric 
for the assessment of fluency and coherence of 
language.  
293. Kavya notes down the errors committed by 
learners of the class and discusses them once in 
a fortnight. What is this practice known as? 
 (a) Evaluation 
(b) Providing feedback 
 (c) Assessment 
(d) Error correction 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2016  
Ans : (a) Errors committed by learners of the class 
and discuss them once in a fortnight this practice is 
known as 'evaluation' because evaluation refers to 
form an opinion of the value or quality of something 
after thinking about it carefully. This act is done by 
Kavya. Hence option (a) is correct.  
294. Problems of spelling errors of the students can 
be easily solved through 
 (a) dictionary 
(b) textbooks 
 (c) dictation 
(d) teaching aids 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (c) Problems of spelling errors of the students 
can be rectified through dictation. Hence option (c) 
would be correct. 
295. In order to improve the learners’ pronunciation, 
a teacher first needs to 
 (a) use recorded model of sounds 
 (b) do pronunciation drills 
 
(c) show the documentary/films of the target 
language 
 (d) ask them to read more 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2015 
Ans : (a) A teacher can improve the learner’s 
pronunciation by using a recorded model of sounds. 
Hence option (a) would be correct. 
www.SarkariTeachers.com

===== PAGE 33 =====
 
TET Bullet English 
704 
YCT 
296. A class VII student makes mistakes in spelling. 
As a teacher would you 
 
(a) show him his mistakes and ask him to 
repronounce them? 
 (b) ignore the mistakes? 
 (c) allow the student to use a mobile dictionary? 
 (d) ask the student to repronounce the word? 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2015 
Ans : (a) A teacher should show the student his 
mistakes and ask him to repronounce them. Hence 
option (a). 
297. While writing a student finds difficulty in 
expressing his/her views clearly due to lack of 
vocabulary. A possible solution would be the 
following 
 
(a) give a list of words with meanings to learn and 
use 
 
(b) conduct special classes to practice writing with 
periodic word dictations and drills 
 
(c) motivate the student to read more story books 
and the teacher should take informal feedback 
about new words encountered 
 (d) change the topic to suit the student’s ability 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Feb 2014 
Ans : (c) If a student finds difficulty in expressing his 
views due to lack of vocabulary, the teacher should 
motivate the student to read more story books and 
take informal feedback about new words encountered. 
Hence option (c) is correct. 
298. How can you get shy students to speak when 
they do not want go? 
 
(a) Don’t put pressure on them to come up with a 
response quickly 
 (b) Change the topic to suit the students ability 
 
(c) Give a list of words with meanings to learn and 
use 
 (d) Conduct special classes to practice speaking 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
Ans : (a) To get the shy students to speak a teacher 
should not put pressure on them to come up with a 
response quickly. Hence option (a) is correct. 
299. Formative Assessment of students’ writing skills 
could be based on 
 (a) group dancing 
 (b) model-making individually 
 (c) scripting a skit in pairs 
 (d) a formal written test 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Sep 2014 
Ans : (c) Formative Assessment of students’ writing 
skills could be made by scripting a skit in pairs. Hence 
option (c) is correct. 
300. Encouraging the student to love the world and 
to imagine a peaceful future and caring for the 
student and encouraging the student to care for 
other is ……. education. 
 (a) distance 
(b) academic 
 (c) values 
(d) vocational 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I July 2013 
Ans : (c) Encouraging the student to love and care and 
feel for others is imparting values education. Hence 
option (c) would be correct. 
301. Teachers should not give corporal punishment 
to learners because 
 (a) it is only an emotional release for the  
  
teachers 
 (b) it makes parents very angry 
 (c) it is risky 
 (d) it creates stress and fear in learners 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I Jan 2012 
Ans : (d) Teachers should not give corporal 
punishment to learners because it creates stress and 
fear in learners. Hence option (d) is correct. 
302. Which among the following is a feature of a 
child-centred language classroom? 
 
(a) Children interact in the target language through 
tasks that require multiple intelligences 
 (b) Children work individually to prepare projects 
 (c) Teacher plans assessment every day 
 
(d) Teacher gives instructions and expects children 
to obey and be disciplined 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
Ans : (d) In a child-centred language class the teacher 
gives instructions and expects them to obey and be 
disciplined. Hence option (d). 
303. A teacher can develop listening skills in English 
by 
 
(a) focusing only on listening skills without 
associating it with other language skills 
 
(b) making the learners listen to everything they 
hear passively 
 
(c) creating opportunities for them to listen to a 
variety of sources and people and engage in 
listening activities 
 
(d) speaking to them continuously both within the 
classroom and outside 
CTET (VI-VIII) Language-I June 2011 
Ans : (c) A teacher can develop listening skills in 
english by creating opportunities for the students to 
listen to a variety of sources and people with proper 
pronunciation which they can understand easily. 
Hence option (c). 
304. Remedial teaching involves 
 (a) teaching and testing 
 (b) testing continuously 
 (c) teaching, testing and reteaching 
 (d) teaching difficult topics 
UPTET (VI-VIII) June, 2013 
Ans : (a) Remedial teaching involves teaching and 
testing for constant improvement in teaching and 
learning. Hence option (a) would be correct. 
www.SarkariTeachers.com
